                        CENTRAL ORDINANCES PROMULGATED IN YEAR 2021 
1. THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR REORGANISATION (AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 
     2021. 
2. THE TRIBUNALS REFORMS (RATIONALISATION AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) 
     ORDINANCE, 2021. 
3. THE INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY CODE (AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 2021. 
4. THE COMMISSION FOR AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT IN NATIONAL CAPITAL 
      REGION AND ADJOINING AREAS ORDINANCE, 2021. 
5. THE INDIAN MEDICINE CENTRAL COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 2021. 
6. THE HOMOEOPATHY CENTRAL COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 2021. 
7. THE ESSENTIAL DEFENCE SERVICES ORDINANCE, 2021. 
8. THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES 
    (AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 2021 
9. THE CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 2021 
10. THE DELHI SPECIAL POLICE ESTABLISHMENT (AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 2021 
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx  II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED  BY  AUTHORITY
lañ   1]
ubZ fnYyh] c`gLifrokj] tuojh 07] 2021@ikS"k 17] 1942 ¼'kd½
No. 1]
 NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, JANUARY 07, 2021/PAUSHA 17, 1942 (SAKA)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—(,u)04@0007@2003—20
REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—20
xxxGIDHxxx
xxxGIDExxx
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-07012021-224269
CG-DL-E-07012021-224269
MGIPMRND—1134GI—07-01-2021.
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD,  NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF  PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
2
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[PART II— SEC. 1]
34 of  2019.
.
SUBIR 
NARAYAN 
GARAI
Digitally signed by SUBIR 
NARAYAN GARAI 
Date: 2021.01.07 18:33:54 
+05'30'
1
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx  II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED  BY  AUTHORITY
lañ  20]                            ubZ fnYyh] jfookj] vizSy 4] 2021@pS= 14] 1943 ¼'kd½
No. 20]
NEW DELHI, SUNDAY, APRIL 4, 2021/CHAITRA 14, 1943 (SAKA)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
xxxGIDHxxx
xxxGIDExxx
jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—(,u)04@0007@2003—21
REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—21
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 
New Delhi, the 4th April, 2021/Chaitra 14, 1943  (Saka) 
THE TRIBUNALS REFORMS 
(RATIONALISATION AND CONDITIONS OF 
SERVICE) ORDINANCE, 2021 
NO. 2 OF 2021 
Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-Second 
Year of the Republic of India. 
 
An Ordinance further to amend the Cinematograph 
Act, 1952, the Customs Act, 1962, the Airports Authority 
of India Act, 1994, the Trade Marks Act, 1999 and the 
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Act, 
2001 and certain other Acts. 
 
WHEREAS The Tribunal Reforms (Rationalisation 
and Conditions of Service) Bill, 2021 has been 
introduced in the House of the People on the 13th day of 
February, 2021; 
 
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-04042021-226364
CG-DL-E-04042021-226364
2 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
AND WHEREAS the aforesaid Bill could not be taken 
up for consideration and passing in the House of the 
People; 
 
 
AND WHEREAS Parliament is not in session and 
the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which 
render it necessary for him to take immediate action; 
 
 
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers 
conferred by clause (1) of article 123 of the Constitution, 
the President is pleased to promulgate the following 
Ordinance:— 
 
 
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
 
 
1.(1) This Ordinance may be called the Tribunals 
Reforms (Rationalisation and Conditions of Service) 
Ordinance, 2021. 
Short title and 
commencement. 
 
(2) It shall come into force at once.
 
Definitions. 
2.In this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise 
requires,– 
 
 
(a) 
“notified 
date” 
means 
the 
date 
of 
commencement of this Ordinance;
 
 
(b) “Schedule” means the Schedule appended to 
this Ordinance;
 
 
CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE CINEMATOGRAPH ACT, 1952 
 
Amendment of 
Act 37 of 1952. 
3.  In the Cinematograph Act, 1952, — 
 
 
  (a) in section 2, clause (h) shall be omitted;
 
 
(b) in section 5C,–
 
 
(i) for the word “Tribunal”, at both the 
places where it occurs, the words “High Court” 
shall be substituted; 
 
 
(ii) sub-section (2) shall be omitted;
 
 
(c) sections 5D and 5DD shall be omitted;
 
 
(d) in section 6, the words “or, as the case may be, 
decided by the Tribunal (but not including any 
proceeding in respect of any matter which is pending 
before the Tribunal)” shall be omitted;
 
 
(e) in sections 7A and 7C, for the word 
“Tribunal”, wherever it occurs, the words “High 
Court” shall be substituted;
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
3 
 
 
 
(f) in sections 7D, 7E and 7F, the words “the 
Tribunal,”, wherever they occur, shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(g) in section 8, in sub-section (2), clauses (h), (i), 
(j), and (k) shall be omitted. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
AMENDMENTS TO THE COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957 
 
 
Amendment of 
Act 14 of 1957. 
3. In the Copyright Act, 1957,— 
 
 
 
(a) in section 2,–– 
 
 
 
(i) clause (aa) shall be omitted;  
 
 
 
(ii) clause (fa) shall be re-lettered as clause (faa) 
and before the clause (faa) as so re-lettered, the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely:–– 
 
 
 
‘(fa) “Commercial Court”, for the purposes of any 
State, means a Commercial Court constituted under 
section 3, or the Commercial Division of a High 
Court constituted under section 4, of the Commercial 
Courts Act, 2015;’;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 of 2016. 
 
(iii) for clause (u),  the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:––  
 
 
 
‘(u) “prescribed” means,—  
 
(A) in relation to proceedings before a High 
Court, prescribed by rules made by the High 
Court; and  
 
(B) in other cases, prescribed by rules made 
under this Act;’; 
 
 
 
(b) in section 6,–– 
 
 
 
(i) for the words “Appellate Board”, wherever 
they occur, the words “Commercial Court” shall be 
substituted; 
 
 
 
(ii) the words “constituted under section 11 whose 
decision thereon shall be final” shall be omitted; 
 
4 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
(c) in Chapter II, in the Chapter heading, the words 
“AND APPELLATE BOARD” shall be omitted;  
 
 
 
(d) sections 11 and 12 shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(e) in sections 19A, 23, 31, 31A, 31B, 31C, 31D, 32, 
32A and 33A, for the words “Appellate Board”, wherever 
they occur, the words “Commercial Court” shall be 
substituted; 
 
 
 
(f) in section 50, for the words “Appellate Board”, 
wherever they occur, the words “High Court” shall be 
substituted;  
 
 
 
(g) in section 53A,–– 
 
 
 
(i) for the words “Appellate Board”, wherever 
they occur, the words “Commercial Court” shall be 
substituted;  
 
 
 
(ii) in sub-section (2), the words “and the 
decision of the Appellate Board in this behalf shall 
be final” shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(h) in section 54, for the words “Appellate Board”, 
the words “Commercial Court” shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
(i) for section 72, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
 
 
 
  “72. (1) Any person aggrieved by any final 
decision or order of the Registrar of Copyrights may, 
within three months from the date of the order or 
decision, appeal to the High Court. 
 
Appeals against 
orders 
of 
Registrar 
of 
Copyrights. 
 
(2) Every such appeal shall be heard by a single 
Judge of the High Court: 
 
 
 
Provided that any such Judge may, if he so 
thinks fit, refer the appeal at any stage of the 
proceeding to a Bench of the High Court. 
 
 
 
(3) Where an appeal is heard by a single Judge, 
a further appeal shall lie to a Bench of the High 
Court within three months from the date of decision 
or order of the single Judge.  
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
5 
 
 
 
(4) In calculating the period of three months 
provided for an appeal under this section, the time 
taken in granting a certified copy of the order or 
record of the decision appealed against shall be 
excluded.”; 
 
 
 
(j) in sections 74 and 75, the words “and the 
Appellate Board”, wherever they occur, shall be omitted;  
 
 
 
(k) in section 77, the words “and every member of 
the Appellate Board” shall be omitted;  
 
 
 
(l) in section 78, in sub-section (2),–– 
 
 
 
(i) clauses (cA) and (ccB) shall be omitted;  
 
 
 
 (ii) in clause (f), the words “and the Appellate 
Board” shall be omitted. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
AMENDMENTS TO THE CUSTOMS ACT, 1962 
 
 
Amendment of 
Act 52 of 1962. 
5. In the Customs Act, 1962,– 
 
 
 
(a) in section 28E, clauses (ba), (f) and (g) shall be 
omitted; 
 
 
 
(b) in section 28EA, the proviso shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(c) in section 28F, sub-section (1) shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(d) in section 28KA,–– 
 
 
 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the word “Appellate 
Authority”, at both the places where they occur, the 
words “High Court” shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
(ii) sub-section (2) shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(e) in section 28L, the words “or Appellate 
Authority”, wherever they occur, shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(f) in section 28M,–– 
 
 
 
(i) in the marginal heading, the words “and  
6 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
Appellate Authority” shall be omitted; 
 
 
(ii) sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
AMENDMENTS TO THE PATENTS ACT, 1970 
 
 
Amendment of 
Act 39 of 1970. 
6.  In the Patents Act, 1970,— 
 
 
 
(a) in section 2, in sub-section (1),–– 
 
 
 
(i) clause (a) shall be omitted;  
 
 
 
(ii) in clause (u), sub-clause (B) shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(b) in section 52, the words “Appellate Board or”, 
wherever they occur, shall be omitted;   
 
 
 
(c) in section 58,–– 
 
 
 
(i) the words “the Appellate Board or”, wherever 
they occur, shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(ii) the words “as the case may be” shall be 
omitted;  
 
 
 
(d) in section 59, the words “the Appellate Board or” 
shall be omitted;  
 
 
 
(e) in section 64, in sub-section (1), the words “by 
the Appellate Board” shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(f) in section 71, for the words “Appellate Board” 
and “Board”, wherever they occur, the words “High 
Court” shall be substituted;  
 
 
 
(g) in section 76, the words “or Appellate Board” 
shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(h) in section 113,–– 
 
 
 
(i) in sub-section (1),–– 
 
 
 
(A) the words “the Appellate Board or”, 
wherever they occur, shall be omitted; 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
7 
 
 
 
 
(B) the words “as the case may be” shall be 
omitted; 
 
 
 
(ii) in sub-section (3), the words “or the Appellate 
Board” shall be omitted;  
 
 
 
  (i) in Chapter XIX, for the Chapter heading, the 
Chapter heading “APPEALS” shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
 (j) sections 116 and 117 shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
  (k) in section 117A, for the words “Appellate 
Board”, wherever they occur, the words “High Court” 
shall be substituted;  
 
 
 
(l) sections 117B, 117C and 117D shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
 (m) in section 117E, for the words “Appellate 
Board”, wherever they occur, the words “High Court” 
shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
(n) sections 117F, 117G and 117H shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(o) in section 151,–– 
 
 
 
(A) in sub-section (1), the words “or the 
Appellate Board”, at both the places where they 
occur, shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(B) in sub-section (3), for the words “the 
Appellate Board or the courts, as the case may be”, 
the words “the courts” shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
(p) in section 159, in sub-section (2), clauses (xiia), 
(xiib) and (xiic) shall be omitted. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
AMENDMENTS TO THE AIRPORT AUTHORITY 
OF INDIA ACT, 1994  
 
 
 
7.  In the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994,— 
 
Amendment of 
Act 55 of 1994. 
 
(a) in section 28A, clause (e) shall be omitted; 
 
 
8 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
 
 (b) in section 28E, for the word “Tribunal”, at 
both the places where it occurs, the words “Central 
Government” shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
(c) sections 28I, 28J and 28JA shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(d) in section 28K,––– 
 
 
 
(i) in sub-section (1),–– 
 
 
(A) for the words “Tribunal in such form as 
may be prescribed”, the words “High Court” shall 
be substituted; 
 
 
 
(B) in the proviso, for the word “Tribunal”, the 
words “High Court” shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
(ii) sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) shall be 
omitted; 
 
 
 
(e) section 28L shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(f) in section 28M, the words “or the Tribunal” 
shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(g) in section 28N, in sub-section (2), for the word 
“Tribunal”, the words “High Court” shall be 
substituted; 
 
 
 
(h) in section 33, the words “or the Chairperson of 
the Tribunal” shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(i) in section 41, in sub-section (2), clauses (gvi), 
(gvii), (gviii) and (gix) shall be omitted. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VII 
 
AMENDMENTS TO THE TRADE MARKS 
ACT, 1999 
 
 
Amendment of 
Act 47 of 1999. 
8.  In the Trade Marks Act, 1999,— 
 
 
 
(a) in section 2, in sub-section (1), –– 
 
 
 
(i) clauses (a), (d), (f), (k), (n), (ze) and (zf) 
shall be omitted; 
 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
9 
 
 
 
(ii) for clause (s), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
 
 
 
‘(s) “prescribed” means,—  
 
(i) in relation to proceedings before a High 
Court, prescribed by rules made by the High 
Court; and  
 
(ii) in other cases, prescribed by rules 
made under this Act;’; 
 
 
 
(b) in section 10, for the word “tribunal”, the 
words “Registrar or the High Court, as the case may 
be,” shall be substituted; 
 
 
(c) in section 26, for the word “tribunal”, the 
words “Registrar or the High Court, as the case may 
be,” shall be substituted; 
 
 
(d) in section 46, in sub-section (3), for the word 
“tribunal”, the words “Registrar or the High Court, 
as the case may be,” shall be substituted; 
 
 
(e) in section47, –– 
 
 
(i)  for the words “Appellate Board”, at both 
the places where it occurs, the words “High 
Court” shall be substituted;   
 
 
(ii) for the word “tribunal”, wherever it occurs, 
the words “Registrar or the High Court, as the 
case may be,” shall be substituted; 
 
 
(f) in section 55, in sub-section (1), for the word 
“tribunal”, the words “Registrar or the High Court, 
as the case may be,” shall be substituted; 
 
 
(g) in section 57, –– 
 
 
(i) for the words “Appellate Board”, wherever it 
occurs, the words “High Court” shall be 
substituted;   
 
 
(ii) for the word “tribunal”, wherever it occurs, 
the words “Registrar or the High Court, as the case 
may be,” shall be substituted; 
 
 
(h) in section 71, in sub-section (3), for the word 
“tribunal”, the words “Registrar or the High Court, 
as the case may be,” shall be substituted; 
 
 
(i) in Chapter XI, for the Chapter heading,  the  
10 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
Chapter heading “APPEALS” shall be substituted;  
 
 
(j) sections 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 89A and 90  
shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(k) in section 91,for the words “Appellate 
Board”, wherever they occur, the words “High 
Court” shall be substituted;  
 
 
 
(l) sections 92 and 93 shall be omitted;  
 
 
 
(m) for section 94, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
 
 
Bar to appear 
before 
Registrar. 
“94. On ceasing to hold the office, the erstwhile 
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or other Members, 
shall not appear before the Registrar.”; 
 
 
 
(l) sections 95 and 96 shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(m) in section 97, for the words “Appellate 
Board”, wherever they occur, the words “High 
Court” shall be substituted;  
 
 
 
(n) in section 98, for the words “Appellate Board” 
and “Board”, wherever they occur, the words “High 
Court” shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
(o) sections 99 and 100 shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(p) in section 113, –– 
 
 
 
  (i) for the words “Appellate Board”, at both 
the places where they occur, the words “High 
Court” shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
 (ii) for the word “tribunal”, the words 
“Registrar or the High Court, as the case may be,” 
shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
(q) in section 123, the words “and every Member 
of the Appellate Board” shall be omitted;  
 
 
 
(r) in sections 124 and 125, for the words 
“Appellate Board”, wherever they occur, the words 
“High Court” shall be substituted; 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
11 
 
 
 
 
(s) in section 130, the words “the Appellate Board 
or” shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(t) in section 141, for the words “Appellate 
Board”, at both the places where they occur, the 
words “High Court” shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
(u) in section 144, for the word “tribunal”, the 
words “Registrar or the High Court, as the case may 
be,” shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
(v) in section 157, in sub-section (2),–– 
 
 
 
(i) clauses (xxxi) and (xxxii) shall be omitted;  
 
 
 
(ii) in clause (xxxiii), for the words “Appellate 
Board”, the words “High Court” shall be 
substituted. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
 
AMENDMENTS TO THE GEOGRAPHICAL 
INDICATIONS OF GOODS (REGISTRATION AND 
PROTECTION) ACT, 1999 
 
 
Amendment of 
Act 48 of 1999. 
9. In the Geographical Indications of Goods 
(Registration and Protection) Act, 1999,— 
 
 
 
(a) in section 2, in sub-section (1), clauses (a) 
and (p) shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(b) in section 19, for the word “tribunal”, the 
words “Registrar or the High Court, as the case 
may be,” shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
(c) in section 23, for the words “and before the 
Appellate Board before which”, the words “before 
whom” shall be substituted;  
 
 
 
(d) in section 27, –– 
 
 
   (i) for the words “Appellate Board”, wherever 
they occur, the words “High Court” shall be 
substituted; 
 
 
 
(ii) for the word “tribunal”, wherever it occurs,  
12 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
the words “Registrar or the High Court, as the 
case may be,” shall be substituted; 
 
 
(e) in Chapter VII, for the Chapter heading, the 
Chapter heading “APPEALS” shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
 
(f) in section 31,–– 
 
 
 
(i) for the words “Appellate Board”, wherever 
they occur, the words “High Court” shall be 
substituted;  
 
 
 
(ii) sub-section (3) shall be omitted;  
 
 
 
(g) sections 32 and 33 shall be omitted;  
 
 
 
(h) in sections 34 and 35, for the words “Appellate 
Board”, wherever they occur, the words “High 
Court” shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
(i) section 36 shall be omitted;  
 
 
 
(j) in sections 48,–– 
 
 
 
(i) for the words “Appellate Board”, at both the 
places where it occurs, the words “High Court” 
shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
(ii) for the word “tribunal”, the words 
“Registrar or the High Court, as the case may be,” 
shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
(k) in sections 57 and 58, for the words “Appellate 
Board”, wherever they occur, the words “High 
Court” shall be substituted;  
 
 
 
(l) in section 63, the words “the Appellate Board 
or” shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(m) in section 72, for the words “Appellate 
Board”, wherever they occur, the words “High 
Court” shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
(n) in section 75, for the word “tribunal”, the 
words “Registrar or the High Court, as the case may 
be,” shall be substituted; 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
13 
 
 
 
 
(o) in section 87, in sub-section (2), clause (n) 
shall be omitted.  
 
 
 
CHAPTER IX 
 
AMENDMENTS TO THE PROTECTION OF 
PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS 
ACT, 2001 
 
 
Amendment of 
Act 53 of 2001. 
10. In the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ 
Rights Act, 2001,– 
 
 
 
(a) in section 2, –– 
 
 
 
   (i) clauses (d), (n) and (o) shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(ii) for clause (q),  the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:––  
 
 
 
‘(q) “prescribed” means,—  
 
(A) in relation to proceedings before a High 
Court, prescribed by rules made by the High 
Court; and  
 
(B) in other cases, prescribed by rules made 
under this Act;’: 
 
 
 
(iii) clauses (y) and (z) shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(b) in section 44, the words “or the Tribunal” shall 
be omitted;  
 
 
 
(c) in Chapter VIII, for the Chapter heading, the 
Chapter heading “APPEALS” shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
(d) sections 54 and 55 shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(e) in section 56,–– 
 
 
 
(i) for the word “Tribunal”, wherever they occur, 
the words “High Court” shall be substituted;  
 
 
(ii) sub-section (3) shall be omitted;  
 
 
 
(f) in section 57,– 
 
14 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
 
(i) for the word “Tribunal”, wherever it occurs, the 
words “High Court” shall be substituted; 
 
 
 
(ii) sub-section (5) shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(g) sections 58 and 59 shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(h) in section 89, the words “or the Tribunal” shall 
be omitted. 
 
 
CHAPTER X 
 
AMENDMENTS TO THE CONTROL OF 
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS (LAND AND TRAFFIC) 
ACT, 2002 
 
 
 
11.  In the Control of National Highways (Land and 
Traffic) Act, 2002,— 
 
Amendment of 
Act 13 of 2003. 
 
(a) in section 2,– 
 
 
 
(i) clause (a) shall be omitted;  
 
 
 
(ii) after clause (d), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:––  
 
 
 
‘(da) “Court” means the principal Civil Court of 
original jurisdiction in a district, and includes the 
High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil 
jurisdiction;’; 
 
 
 
(iii) clause (l) shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(b) in Chapter II, in the Chapter heading, the 
words “AND TRIBUNALS, ETC.” shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(c) section 5 shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
 (d) for section 14, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:– 
 
 
Appeals. 
“14. An appeal from any order passed, or any 
action taken, excluding issuance or serving of 
notices, under sections 26, 27, 28, 36, 37 and 38 by 
the Highway Administration or an officer authorised 
on its behalf, as the case may be, shall lie to the 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
15 
 
 
Court.”; 
 
 
(e) sections 15 and 16 shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(f) in section 17, for the word “Tribunal”, at both 
the places where it occurs, the word “Court” shall be 
substituted; 
 
 
 
(g) section 18 shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(h) in section 19, for the word “Tribunal”, at both 
the places where it occurs, the word “Court” shall be 
substituted; 
 
 
 
(i) section 40 shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(j) in section 41,–– 
 
 
 
(i) the words “or every order passed or decision 
made on appeal under this Act by the Tribunal” 
shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(ii) the words “or Tribunal” shall be omitted;  
 
 
 
(k) in section 50, in sub-section (2), clause (f) shall 
be omitted. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER XI 
 
AMENDMENTS TO THE FINANCE ACT, 2017 
 
 
Amendment of 
Act 7 of 2017. 
12. In the Finance Act, 2017 (hereinafter referred to 
as the Finance Act),–– 
 
 
 
(i) for section 184, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
 
 
Qualifications, 
appointment, 
etc., 
of 
Chairperson and 
Members 
of 
Tribunal. 
“184. (1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules to provide for the qualifications, 
appointment, salaries and allowances, resignation, 
removal and the other conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and Members of the Tribunal as specified in 
the Eighth Schedule:  
 
 
Provided that a person who has not completed the 
age of fifty years shall not be eligible for appointment as 
a Chairperson or Member: 
 
16 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
 
Provided further that the allowances and benefits so 
payable shall be to the extent as are admissible to a 
Central Government officer holding the post carrying the 
same pay: 
 
 
 
Provided also that where the Chairperson or Member 
takes a house on rent, he may be reimbursed a house rent 
subject to such limits and conditions as may be provided 
by rules. 
 
 
 
(2) The Chairperson and Members of a Tribunal 
shall be appointed by the Central Government on the 
recommendation of a Search-cum-Selection Committee 
(hereinafter referred to as the Committee) constituted 
under sub-section (3), in such manner as the Central 
Government may, by rules, provide.  
 
 
 
(3) The Search-cum-Selection Committee shall 
consist of— 
 
 
 
(a) the Chief Justice of India or a Judge of 
Supreme Court nominated by him–– Chairperson of 
the Committee; 
 
 
 
(b) two Secretaries nominated by the Government 
of India –– Members; 
 
 
 
(c) one Member, who–– 
 
 
 
(i) in case of appointment of a Chairperson 
of 
a 
Tribunal, 
shall 
be 
the 
outgoing 
Chairperson of the Tribunal; or 
 
 
 
(ii) in case of appointment of a Member of a 
Tribunal, shall be the sitting Chairperson of the 
Tribunal; or 
 
 
 
(iii) in case of the Chairperson of the 
Tribunal seeking re-appointment, shall be a 
retired Judge of the Supreme Court or a retired 
Chief Justice of a High Court nominated by the 
Chief Justice of India: 
 
 
Provided that, in the following cases,  such 
Member shall always be a retired Judge of the 
Supreme Court or a retired Chief Justice of a 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
17 
 
 
High Court nominated by the Chief Justice of 
India, namely:–– 
 
 
(i) Industrial Tribunal constituted by the 
Central Government under the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947; 
 
 
 
14 of 1947. 
 
 
(ii) Tribunals and Appellate Tribunals 
constituted under the Recovery of Debts Due to 
Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993;  
 
 
 
 
51 of 1993. 
 
(iii) Tribunals where the Chairperson or the 
outgoing Chairperson, as the case may be, of 
the Tribunal is not a retired Judge of the 
Supreme Court or a retired Chief Justice or 
Judge of a High Court; and 
 
 
 
(iv) such other Tribunals as may be notified 
by the Central Government in consultation with 
the Chairperson of the Search-cum-Selection  
Committee of that Tribunal; and 
 
 
 
(d) the Secretary to the Government of India in 
the Ministry or Department under which the 
Tribunal is constituted or established –– Member-
Secretary. 
 
 
 
(4) The Chairperson of the Committee shall have 
the casting vote. 
 
 
 
(5) The Member-Secretary of the Committee 
shall not have any vote. 
 
 
 
(6) The Committee shall determine its procedure 
for making its recommendations. 
 
 
 
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
judgment, order or decree of any court or in any law 
for the time being in force, the Committee shall 
recommend a panel of two names for appointment to 
the post of Chairperson or Member, as the case may 
be, and the Central Government shall take a decision 
on the recommendations of the Committee preferably 
within three months from the date on which the 
Committee makes its recommendations to the 
Government. 
 
18 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
 
(8) No appointment shall be invalid merely by 
reason of any vacancy or absence in the Committee. 
 
 
 
(9) The Chairperson and Member of a Tribunal 
shall be eligible for re-appointment in accordance with 
the provisions of this section: 
 
 
 
Provided that in making such re-appointment, 
preference shall be given to the service rendered by 
such person. 
 
 
 
(10) The Central Government shall, on the 
recommendation of the Committee, remove from 
office, in such manner as may be provided by rules, 
any Member, who— 
 
 
 
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or 
 
 
 
(b) has been convicted of an offence which 
involves moral turpitude; or 
 
 
 
(c) has become physically or mentally 
incapable of acting as such a Member; or 
 
 
 
(d) has acquired such financial or other 
interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his 
functions as a Member; or 
 
 
 
(e) has so abused his position as to render his 
continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest: 
 
 
 
Provided that where a Member is proposed to 
be removed on any ground specified in clauses 
(b) to (e), he shall be informed of the charges 
against him and given an opportunity of being 
heard in respect of those charges. 
 
 
 
Explanation.–– For the purposes of this section, the 
expressions –– 
 
 
 
(i) “Tribunal” means a Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal 
or Authority as specified in column (2) of the Eighth 
Schedule; 
 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
19 
 
 
 
(ii) “Chairperson” includes Chairperson, Chairman, 
President and Presiding Officer of a Tribunal;  
 
 
 
(iii) “Member” includes Vice-Chairman, Vice-
Chairperson, 
Vice-President, 
Account 
Member, 
Administrative Member, Judicial Member, Expert 
Member, Law Member, Revenue Member and 
Technical Member, as the case may be, of a 
Tribunal.”; 
 
 
 
 (ii) in section 184 as so substituted, after sub-section 
(10) and before the Explanation, the following sub-
section shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have 
been inserted with effect from the 26th May, 2017, 
namely:–– 
 
 
 
“(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
judgment, order, or decree of any court or any law for the 
time being in force, –– 
 
 
 
(i) the Chairperson of a Tribunal shall hold office 
for a term of four years or till he attains the age of 
seventy years, whichever is earlier; 
 
 
 
(ii) the Member of a Tribunal shall hold office for 
a term of four years or till he attains the age of sixty-
seven years, whichever is earlier:  
 
 
 
Provided that where a Chairperson or Member is 
appointed between the 26th day of May, 2017 and the 
notified date and the term of his office or the age of 
retirement specified in the order of appointment issued by 
the Central Government is greater than that which is 
specified in this section, then, notwithstanding anything 
contained in this section, the term of office or age of 
retirement or both, as the case may be, of the Chairperson 
or Member shall be as specified in his order of 
appointment subject to a maximum term of office of five 
years.”. 
 
Amendment of 
section 186. 
13. Section 186 of the Finance Act shall be 
renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and after sub-
section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely:–– 
 
 
“(2) Subject to the provisions of sections 184 and 
185, neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms 
and conditions of service of Chairperson, Vice-
 
20 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
Chairperson, Chairman, Vice-Chairman, President, Vice-
President, Presiding Officer or Member of the Tribunal, 
Appellate Tribunal or, as the case may be, other 
Authority may be varied to his disadvantage after his 
appointment.”. 
 
 
14. In the Finance Act, in the Eighth Schedule, –– 
 
Amendment of 
Eighth 
Schedule. 
 
(i)items 10, 12, 14, and 15 shall be omitted; 
 
 
 
(ii) for item 16, the following item shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
16. 
National 
Consumer 
Disputes 
Redressal  
Commission 
The 
Consumer 
Protection Act, 2019 
(35 of 2019) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
law for the time being in force, any person appointed as 
the Chairperson or Chairman or President or Presiding 
Officer or Vice-Chairperson or Vice-Chairman or Vice-
President or Member of the Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal, 
or, as the case may be, other Authorities specified in the 
Schedule and holding office as such immediately before 
the notified date, shall, on and from the notified date, 
cease to hold such office, and he shall be entitled to claim 
compensation not exceeding three months' pay and 
allowances for the premature termination of term of his 
office or of any contract of service. 
 
Transitional 
provisions. 
 
(2) The officers and other employees of the 
Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals and other Authorities 
specified in the Schedule appointed on deputation, before 
the notified date, shall, on and from the notified date, 
stand reverted to their parent cadre, Ministry or 
Department. 
 
 
 
(3) Any appeal, application or proceeding pending 
before the Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal or other 
Authorities specified in the Schedule, other than those 
pending before the Authority for Advance Rulings under 
the Income-tax Act, 1961, before the notified date, shall 
stand transferred to the Court before which it would have 
been filed had this Ordinance been in force on the date of 
filing of such appeal or application or initiation of the 
 
 
 
 
 
43 of 1961. 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
21 
 
 
proceeding, and the Court may proceed to deal with such 
cases from the stage at which it stood before such 
transfer, or from any earlier stage, or de novo, as the 
Court may deem fit. 
 
 
(4) The balance of all monies received by, or 
advanced to, the Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal or other 
Authorities specified in the Schedule and not spent by it 
before the notified date, shall, on and from the notified 
date, stand transferred to the Central Government. 
 
 
 
(5) All property of whatever kind owned by, or 
vested in, the Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal or other 
Authorities specified in the Schedule before the notified 
date, shall stand transferred to, on and from the notified 
date, and shall vest in the Central Government. 
 
 
Power 
to 
remove 
difficulties. 
16. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the 
provisions of this Ordinance, the Central Government 
may, by general or special order published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Ordinance, as appear to it to be 
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. 
 
 
 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as 
soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
Houses of Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— SEC. 1] 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 15) 
 
 
1. Appellate Tribunal under Cinematograph Act, 1952 (37 of 1952). 
2. Authority for Advance Rulings under Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961). 
3. Airport Appellate Tribunal under Airports Authority of India Act, 1994 (Act 55 of 1994). 
4. Intellectual Property Appellate Board under Trade Marks Act, 1999 (47 of 1999).  
5. Plant Varieties Protection Appellate Tribunal under Protection of Plant Varieties and 
Farmers’ Rights Act, 2001 (53 of 2001).  
 
 
 
RAM NATH KOVIND, 
President. 
 
 
———— 
 
 
DR. G. NARAYANA RAJU, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD,  NEW DELHI–110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF  PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054. 
 
MGIPMRND—05GI(S3)—04-04-2021. 
JAGANATHAN 
ANANTHA 
KUMAR
Digitally signed by 
JAGANATHAN ANANTHA 
KUMAR 
Date: 2021.04.04 23:04:45 
+05'30'
1
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx  II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED  BY  AUTHORITY
lañ  21]                            ubZ fnYyh] jfookj] vizSy 4] 2021@pS= 14] 1943 ¼'kd½
No. 21]
NEW DELHI, SUNDAY, APRIL 4, 2021/CHAITRA 14, 1943 (SAKA)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
xxxGIDHxxx
xxxGIDExxx
jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—(,u)04@0007@2003—21
REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—21
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 
New Delhi, the 4th April, 2021/Chaitra 14, 1943  (Saka) 
 
 
THE INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY CODE 
(AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 2021 
NO. 3 OF 2021 
 
 
Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-second Year 
of the Republic of India. 
 
 
An Ordinance further to amend the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 2016. 
 
 
WHEREAS COVID-19 pandemic has impacted 
businesses, financial markets and economies all over the 
world, including India, and has impacted the business 
operations of micro, small and medium enterprises and 
exposed many of them to financial distress; 
 
 
AND WHEREAS the Government has taken several 
measures to mitigate the distress caused by the pandemic, 
including increasing the minimum amount of default for 
initiation of corporate insolvency resolution process to 
one crore rupees, and suspending filing of applications 
for initiation of corporate insolvency resolution process 
in respect of the defaults arising during the period of one 
year beginning from 25th March 2020; 
 
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-04042021-226365
CG-DL-E-04042021-226365
2 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
AND WHEREAS such suspension for filing of 
applications for initiation of corporate insolvency 
resolution process has ended on 24th March 2021; 
 
 
AND WHEREAS the country has shown remarkable 
resilience, be it tackling the pandemic or ensuring 
economic recovery; 
 
 
AND WHEREAS micro, small and medium enterprises 
are critical for India’s economy as they contribute 
significantly to its gross domestic product and provide 
employment to a sizeable population; 
 
 
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to urgently 
address the specific requirements of micro, small and 
medium enterprises relating to the resolution of their 
insolvency, due to the unique nature of their businesses 
and simpler corporate structures; 
 
 
AND WHEREAS it is considered expedient to provide 
an efficient alternative insolvency resolution process for 
corporate persons classified as micro, small and medium 
enterprises under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 
2016, ensuring quicker, cost-effective and value 
maximising outcomes for all the stakeholders, in a 
manner which is least disruptive to the continuity of their 
businesses and which preserves jobs;   
 
 
AND WHEREAS in order to achieve these objectives, 
it is considered expedient to introduce a pre-packaged 
insolvency resolution process for corporate persons 
classified as micro, small and medium enterprises; 
 
 
AND WHEREAS Parliament is not in session and the 
President is satisfied that circumstances exist which 
render it necessary for him to take immediate action; 
 
 
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers 
conferred by clause (1) of article 123 of the Constitution, 
the President is pleased to promulgate the following 
Ordinance: — 
 
Short title and 
commencement. 
1. (1) This Ordinance may be called the Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021. 
 
 
(2) It shall come into force at once. 
 
Amendment 
of 
section 4. 
2.  In the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 4, 
after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
31 of 2016. 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
3 
 
 “Provided further that the Central Government 
may, by notification, specify such minimum amount 
of default of higher value, which shall not be more 
than one crore rupees, for matters relating to the pre-
packaged insolvency resolution process of corporate 
debtors under Chapter III-A.”.      
 
 
3. In section 5 of the principal Act,— 
Amendment of 
section 5.  
 
(i) after clause (2), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely: — 
 
 
‘(2A) 
“base 
resolution 
plan” 
means 
a 
resolution plan provided by the corporate debtor 
under clause (c) of sub-section (4) of section 
54A;’; 
 
 
(ii) in clause (5), in sub-clause (b), after the words 
“corporate insolvency resolution process”, the words 
“or the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process, as 
the case may be,” shall be inserted; 
 
 
(iii) in clause (11), after the words “corporate 
insolvency resolution process”, the words “or pre-
packaged insolvency resolution process, as the case 
may be” shall be inserted; 
 
 
(iv) inclause (15), after the words, “process 
period”, the words “or by the corporate debtor during 
the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process 
period, as the case may be,” shall be inserted; 
 
 
(v) in clause (19), after the words “for the 
purposes of”, the words and figures “Chapter VI and” 
shall be inserted; 
 
 
(vi) after clause (23), the following clauses shall 
be inserted, namely: — 
 
 
‘(23A)“preliminary information” means a 
memorandum submitted by the corporate debtor 
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 54G; 
 
 
(23B)“pre-packaged insolvency date” means 
the date of admission of an application for 
initiating the pre-packaged insolvency resolution 
process by the Adjudicating Authority under 
clause (a) of sub-section (4) of section 54C; 
 
 
 
4 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
(23C) “pre-packaged insolvency resolution 
process costs” means— 
 
 
(a) the amount of any interim finance and the 
costs incurred in raising such finance; 
 
 
(b) the fees payable to any person acting as a 
resolution 
professional 
and 
any 
expenses 
incurred by him for conducting the pre-packaged 
insolvency resolution process during the pre-
packaged insolvency resolution process period, 
subject to sub-section (6) of section 54F; 
 
 
(c) any costs incurred by the resolution 
professional in running the business of the 
corporate debtor as a going concern pursuant to 
an order under sub-section (2) of section 54J; 
 
 
(d) any costs incurred at the expense of the 
Government to facilitate the pre-packaged 
insolvency resolution process; and 
 
 
(e) anyother costs as may be specified; 
 
 
(23D) “pre-packaged insolvency resolution 
process period” means the period beginning from 
the pre-packaged insolvency commencement date 
and ending on the date on which an order under 
sub-section (1) of section 54L, or sub-section (1) 
of section 54N, or sub-section (2) of section 54-O, 
as the case may be, is passed by the Adjudicating 
Authority;’; 
 
 
(vii) in clause (25), after the words, brackets and 
figures “of sub-section (2) of section 25”, the words, 
figures and letter “or pursuant to section 54K, as the 
case may be” shall be inserted; 
 
 
(viii) in clause (27), after the words “corporate 
insolvency resolution process”, the words “or the pre-
packaged insolvency resolution process, as the case 
may be,” shall be inserted. 
 
Amendment 
of 
section 11. 
4. In section 11 of the principal Act,— 
 
 
(i) in clause (a), after the words “corporate 
insolvency resolution process”, the words “or a pre-
packaged insolvency resolution process” shall be 
inserted; 
 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
5 
 
(ii) after clause (a), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
 
 
“(aa) a financial creditor or an operational 
creditor of a corporate debtor undergoing a pre-
packaged insolvency resolution process; or”; 
 
 
(iii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
 
 
“(ba) a corporate debtor in respect of whom a 
resolution plan has been approved under Chapter 
III-A, twelve months preceding the date of making 
of the application; or”. 
 
 
 
5. After section 11 of the principal Act, the 
following section shall be inserted, namely: — 
Insertion of new 
section 11A.    
 
“11A. (1) Where an application filed under section 
54C is pending, the Adjudicating Authority shall pass 
an order to admit or reject such application, before 
considering any application filed under section 7 or 
section 9 or section 10 during the pendency of such 
application under section 54C, in respect of the same 
corporate debtor. 
Disposal 
of 
applications 
under 
section 
54C and under 
section 
7 
or 
section 
9 
or 
section 10. 
 
(2) Where an application under section 54C is 
filed within fourteen days of filing of any application 
under section 7 or section 9 or section 10, which is 
pending, in respect of the same corporate debtor,then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in sections 7, 9 
and 10, the Adjudicating Authority shall first dispose 
of the application under section 54C. 
 
 
(3) Where an application under section 54C is 
filed after fourteen days of the filing of any 
application under section 7 or section 9 or section 
10, in respect of the same corporate debtor, the 
Adjudicating Authority shall first dispose of the 
application under sections 7, 9 or 10. 
 
 
(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply 
where an application under section 7 or section 9 or 
section 10 is filed and pending as on the date of the 
commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.”. 
 
 
6. In section 33 of the principal Act, in sub-section 
(3), after the words, “approved by the Adjudicating 
Authority”, the words, figures, brackets and letter “under 
Amendment of 
section 33. 
6 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
section 31 or under sub-section (1) of section 54L,” shall 
be inserted. 
Amendment 
of 
section 34.  
7. In section 34 of the principal Act, in sub-section 
(1), after the words and figures, “under Chapter II”, the 
words, figures and letter “or for the pre-packaged 
insolvency resolution process under Chapter III-A” shall 
be inserted.  
 
Insertion of new 
Chapter III-A. 
8. After Chapter III of the principal Act, the 
following Chapter shall be inserted, namely:—
 
 
‘CHAPTER III-A      
 
PRE-PACKAGED INSOLVENCY RESOLUTION 
PROCESS 
 
Corporate 
debtors 
eligible 
for pre-packaged 
insolvency 
resolution 
process. 
 
54A.(1) An application for initiating pre-packaged 
insolvency resolution process may be made in respect of 
a corporate debtor classified as a micro, small or 
medium enterprise under sub-section (1) of section 7 of 
the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development 
Act, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
27 of 2006. 
 
 
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), an 
application for initiating pre-packaged insolvency 
resolution process may be made in respect of a 
corporate debtor, who commits a default referred to in 
section 4, subject to the following conditions, that–– 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
it 
has 
not 
undergone 
pre-packaged 
insolvency 
resolution 
process 
or 
completed 
corporate insolvency resolution process, as the case 
may be, during the period of three years preceding 
the initiation date; 
 
 
(b) it is not undergoing a corporate insolvency 
resolution process; 
 
 
(c) no order requiring it to be liquidated is 
passed under section 33; 
 
 
(d) it is eligible to submit a resolution plan under 
section 29A; 
 
 
(e) the financial creditors of the corporate 
debtor, not being its related parties, representing 
such number and such manner as may be specified, 
have proposed the name of the insolvency 
professional 
to 
be 
appointed 
as 
resolution 
professional for conducting the pre-packaged 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
7 
insolvency resolution process of the corporate 
debtor, and the financial creditors of the corporate 
debtor, not being its related parties, representing not 
less than sixty-six per cent. in value of the financial 
debt due to such creditors, have approved such 
proposal in such form as may be specified: 
 
 Provided that where a corporate debtor does 
not have any financial creditors, not being its 
related parties, the proposal and approval under 
this clause shall be provided by such persons as 
may be specified; 
 
 
(f) the majority of the directors or partners of the 
corporate debtor, as the case may be, have made a 
declaration, in such form as may be specified, 
stating, inter alia, — 
 
 
(i) that the corporate debtor shall file an 
application 
for 
initiating 
pre-packaged 
insolvency resolution process within a definite 
time period not exceeding ninety days; 
 
 
(ii) 
that 
the 
pre-packaged 
insolvency 
resolution process is not being initiated to 
defraud any person; and 
 
 
(iii) the name of the insolvency professional 
proposed and approved to be appointed as 
resolution professional under clause (e); 
 
 
(g) the members of the corporate debtor have 
passed a special resolution, or at least three-fourth of 
the total number of partners, as the case may be, of 
the corporate debtor have passed a resolution, 
approving the filing of an application for initiating 
pre-packaged insolvency resolution process. 
 
 
(3) The corporate debtor shall obtain an approval 
from its financial creditors, not being its related parties, 
representing not less than sixty-six per cent. in value of 
the financial debt due to such creditors, for the filing of 
an application for initiating pre-packaged insolvency 
resolution process, in such form as may be specified:  
 
 
Provided that where a corporate debtor does not 
have any financial creditors, not being its related 
parties, the approval under this sub-section shall be 
provided by such persons as may be specified. 
 
 
8 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
(4) Prior to seeking approval from financial 
creditors under sub-section (3), the corporate debtor 
shall provide such financial creditors with — 
 
 
(a) the declaration referred to inclause (f) of sub-
section (2); 
 
 
(b) the special resolution or resolution referred 
to in clause (g) of sub-section (2); 
 
 
(c) a base resolution plan which conforms to the 
requirements referred to in section 54K, and such 
other conditions as may be specified; and 
 
 
(d) such other information and documents as 
may be specified. 
 
Duties 
of 
resolution 
professional 
before initiation 
of pre-packaged 
insolvency 
resolution 
process. 
54B. (1) The insolvency professional, proposed to 
be appointed as the resolution professional, shall have 
the following duties commencing from the date of the 
approval under clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 
54A, namely:— 
 
 
(a) prepare a report in such form as may be 
specified, confirming whether the corporate debtor 
meets the requirements of section 54A, and the base 
resolution plan conforms to the requirements 
referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (4) of section 
54A; 
 
 
(b) file such reports and other documents, with 
the Board, as may be specified; and 
 
 
(c) perform such other duties as may be 
specified. 
 
 
(2) The duties of the insolvency professional under 
sub-section (1) shall cease, if, —                              
 
 
(a) the corporate debtor fails to file an 
application for initiating pre-packaged insolvency 
resolution process within the time period as stated 
under the declaration referred to in clause (f) of sub-
section (2) of section 54A; or  
 
 
(b) the application for initiating pre-packaged 
insolvency resolution process is admitted or rejected 
by the Adjudicating Authority,  
 
 
as the case may be. 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
9 
 
(3) The fees payable to the insolvency professional 
in relation to the duties performed under sub-section (1) 
shall be determined and borne in such manner as may be 
specified and such fees shall form part of the pre-
packaged insolvency resolution process costs, if the 
application for initiation of pre-packaged insolvency 
resolution process is admitted. 
 
 
54C. (1) Where a corporate debtor meets the 
requirements of section 54A, a corporate applicant 
thereof may file an application with the Adjudicating 
Authority 
for 
initiating 
pre-packaged 
insolvency 
resolution process. 
Application 
to 
initiate 
pre-
packaged 
insolvency 
resolution 
process. 
 
(2) The application under sub-section (1) shall be 
filed in such form, containing such particulars, in such 
manner and accompanied with such fee as may be 
prescribed. 
 
 
(3) The corporate applicant shall, along with the 
application, furnish— 
 
 
(a) the declaration, special resolution or 
resolution, as the case may be, and the approval of 
financial creditors for initiating pre-packaged 
insolvency resolution process in terms of section 
54A; 
 
 
(b) the name and written consent, in such form 
as may be specified, of the insolvency professional 
proposed to be appointed as resolution professional, 
as approved under clause (e) of sub-section (2) of 
section 54A, and his report as referred to in clause 
(a) of sub-section (1) of section 54B; 
 
 
(c) a declaration regarding the existence of any 
transactions of the corporate debtor that may be 
within the scope of provisions in respect of 
avoidance of transactions under Chapter III or 
fraudulent or wrongful trading under Chapter VI, in 
such form as may be specified; 
 
 
(d) information relating to books of account of 
the corporate debtor and such other documents 
relating to such period as may be specified. 
 
 
(4) The Adjudicating Authority shall, within a 
period of fourteen days of the receipt of the application, 
by an order,–– 
 
 
(a) admit the application, if it is complete; or 
 
10 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
(b) reject the application, if it is incomplete: 
 
 
  Provided that the Adjudicating Authority 
shall, before rejecting an application, give notice 
to the applicant to rectify the defect in the 
application within seven days from the date of 
receipt of such notice from the Adjudicating 
Authority. 
 
 
(5) The pre-packaged insolvency resolution process 
shall commence from the date of admission of the 
application under clause (a) of sub-section (4).  
 
Time-limit 
for 
completion 
of 
pre-packaged 
insolvency 
resolution 
process. 
54D. (1) The pre-packaged insolvency resolution 
process shall be completed within a period of one 
hundred and twenty days from the pre-packaged 
insolvency commencement date.      
 
 
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the 
resolution professional shall submit the resolution plan, 
as approved by the committee of creditors, to the 
Adjudicating Authority under sub-section (4) or sub-
section (12), as the case may be, of section 54K, within 
a period of ninety days from the pre-packaged 
insolvency commencement date. 
 
 
(3) Where no resolution plan is approved by the 
committee of creditors within the time period referred to 
in sub-section (2), the resolution professional shall, on 
the day after the expiry of such time period, file an 
application with the Adjudicating Authority for 
termination of the pre-packaged insolvency resolution 
process in such form and manner as may be specified.  
 
Declaration 
of 
moratorium and 
public 
announcement 
during 
pre-
packaged 
insolvency 
resolution 
process. 
54E. (1) The Adjudicating Authority shall, on the 
pre-packaged insolvency commencement date, along 
with the order of admission under section 54C — 
 
 
(a) declare a moratorium for the purposes 
referred to in sub-section (1) read with sub-section 
(3) of section 14, which shall, mutatis mutandis 
apply, to the proceedings under this Chapter;  
 
 
(b) appoint a resolution professional — 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
11 
 
(i) as named in the application, if no 
disciplinary proceeding is pending against him; 
or 
 
 
(ii) based on the recommendation made by 
the Board, if any disciplinary proceeding is 
pending against the insolvency professional 
named in the application.  
 
 
(c) cause a public announcement of the initiation 
of the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process to 
be made by the resolution professional, in such form 
and manner as may be specified, immediately after 
his appointment.  
 
 
(2) The order of moratorium shall have effect from 
the date of such order till the date on which the pre-
packaged insolvency resolution process period comes to 
an end. 
 
 
54F. (1) The resolution professional shall conduct 
the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process of a 
corporate debtor during the pre-packaged insolvency 
resolution process period.      
Duties 
and 
powers 
of 
resolution 
professional 
during 
pre-
packaged 
insolvency 
resolution 
process. 
 
(2) The resolution professional shall perform the 
following duties, namely:— 
 
 
(a) confirm the list of claims submitted by the 
corporate debtor under section 54G, in such manner 
as may be specified; 
 
 
(b) inform creditors regarding their claims as 
confirmed under clause (a), in such manner as may 
be specified; 
 
 
(c) maintain an updated list of claims, in such 
manner as may be specified; 
 
 
(d) monitor management of the affairs of the 
corporate debtor; 
 
 
(e) inform the committee of creditors in the 
event of breach of any of the obligations of the 
Board of Directors or partners, as the case may be, 
of the corporate debtor, under the provisions of this 
Chapter and the rules and regulations made 
thereunder; 
 
12 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
(f) constitute the committee of creditors and 
convene and attend all its meetings; 
 
 
(g) prepare the information memorandum on the 
basis of the preliminary information memorandum 
submitted under section 54G and any other relevant 
information, in such form and manner as may be 
specified; 
 
 
(h) file applications for avoidance of transactions 
under Chapter III or fraudulent or wrongful trading 
under Chapter VI, if any; and 
 
 
(i) such other duties as may be specified. 
 
 
(3) The resolution professional shall exercise the 
following powers, namely:— 
 
 
(a) access all books of accounts, records and 
information available with the corporate debtor; 
 
 
(b) access the electronic records of the corporate 
debtor from an information utility having financial 
information of the corporate debtor; 
 
 
(c) access the books of accounts, records and 
other relevant documents of the corporate debtor 
available with Government authorities, statutory 
auditors, accountants and such other persons as may 
be specified;  
 
 
(d) attend meetings of members, Board of 
Directors and committee of directors, or partners, as 
the case may be, of the corporate debtor; 
 
 
(e) 
appoint 
accountants, 
legal 
or 
other 
professionals in such manner as may be specified;  
 
 
(f) collect all information relating to the assets, 
finances and operations of the corporate debtor for 
determining the financial position of the corporate 
debtor and the existence of any transactions that 
may be within the scope of provisions relating to 
avoidance of transactions under Chapter III or 
fraudulent or wrongful trading under Chapter VI, 
including information relating to — 
 
 
(i) business operations for the previous two 
years from the date of pre-packaged insolvency 
commencement date; 
 
 
(ii) financial and operational payments for  
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
13 
the previous two years from the date of pre-
packaged insolvency commencement date; 
 
(iii) list of assets and liabilities as on the 
initiation date; and 
 
 
(iv) such other matters as may be specified; 
 
 
(g) take such other actions in such manner as 
may be specified. 
 
 
(4) From the date of appointment of the resolution 
professional, the financial institutions maintaining 
accounts of the corporate debtor shall furnish all 
information relating to the corporate debtor available 
with them to the resolution professional, as and when 
required by him. 
 
 
(5) The personnel of the corporate debtor, its 
promoters and any other person associated with the 
management of the corporate debtor shall extend all 
assistance and cooperation to the resolution professional 
as may be required by him to perform his duties and 
exercise his powers, and for such purposes, the 
provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 19 
shall, mutatis mutandis apply, in relation to the 
proceedings under this Chapter. 
 
 
(6) The fees of the resolution professional and any 
expenses incurred by him for conducting the pre-
packaged insolvency resolution process shall be 
determined in such manner as may be specified: 
 
 
   Provided that the committee of creditors may 
impose limits and conditions on such fees and expenses: 
 
 
   Provided further that the fees and expenses for the 
periodprior to the constitution of the committee of 
creditors shall be subject to ratification by it.  
 
 
(7) The fees and expenses referred to in sub-section 
(6) shall be borne in such manner as may be specified. 
 
 
54G. (1) The corporate debtor shall, within two days 
of the pre-packaged insolvency commencement date, 
submit to the resolution professional the following 
information, updated as on that date, in such form and 
manner as may be specified, namely:— 
List of claims 
and preliminary 
information 
memorandum. 
 
(a) a list of claims, along with details of the 
respective creditors, their security interests and 
 
14 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
guarantees, if any; and 
 
(b) a preliminary information memorandum 
containing information relevant for formulating a 
resolution plan. 
 
 
(2) Where any person has sustained any loss or 
damage as a consequence of the omission of any 
material information or inclusion of any misleading 
information in the list of claims or the preliminary 
information memorandum submitted by the corporate 
debtor, every person who— 
 
 
(a) is a promoter or director or partner of the 
corporate debtor, as the case may be, at the time of 
submission of the list of claims or the preliminary 
information memorandum by the corporate debtor; 
or 
 
 
(b) has authorised the submission of the list of 
claims or the preliminary information memorandum 
by the corporate debtor, 
 
 
shall, without prejudice to section 77A, be liable to pay 
compensation to every person who has sustained such 
loss or damage. 
 
 
(3) No person shall be liable under sub-section (2), 
if the list of claims or the preliminary information 
memorandum was submitted by the corporate debtor 
without his knowledge or consent. 
 
 
(4) Subject to section 54E, any person, who 
sustained any loss or damage as a consequence of 
omission of material information or inclusion of any 
misleading information in the list of claims or the 
preliminary information memorandum shall be entitled 
to move a court having jurisdiction for seeking 
compensation for such loss or damage. 
 
Management 
of 
affairs 
of 
corporate debtor. 
54H. During the pre-packaged insolvency resolution 
process period,— 
 
 
 
(a) the management of the affairs of the 
corporate debtor shall continue to vest in the Board 
of Directors or the partners, as the case may be, of 
the corporate debtor, subject to such conditions as 
may be specified; 
 
 
(b) the Board of Directors or the partners, as the  
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
15 
case may be, of the corporate debtor, shall make 
every endeavour to protect and preserve the value of 
the property of the corporate debtor, and manage its 
operations as a going concern; and 
 
(c) the promoters, members, personnel and 
partners, as the case may be, of the corporate debtor, 
shall exercise and discharge their contractual or 
statutory rights and obligations in relation to the 
corporate debtor, subject to the provisions of this 
Chapter and such other conditions and restrictions as 
may be prescribed. 
 
 
54-I. (1) The resolution professional shall, within 
seven 
daysof 
the 
pre-packaged 
insolvency 
commencement date, constitute a committee of 
creditors, based on the list of claims confirmed under 
clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 54F: 
Committee 
of 
creditors. 
 
Provided that the composition of the committee of 
creditors shall be altered on the basis of the updated list 
of claims, in such manner as may be specified, and any 
such alteration shall not affect the validity of any past 
decision of the committee of creditors. 
 
 
(2) The first meeting of the committee of creditors 
shall be held within seven days of the constitution of the 
committee of creditors. 
 
 
(3) Provisions of section 21, except sub-section (1) 
thereof, shall, mutatis mutandis apply, in relation to the 
committee of creditors under this Chapter: 
 
 
 Provided thatfor the purposes of this sub-section, 
references to the “resolution professional” under sub-
sections (9) and (10) of section 21, shall be construed as 
references to “corporate debtor or the resolution 
professional”. 
 
 
54J. (1) Where the committee of creditors, at any 
time during the pre-packaged insolvency resolution 
process period, by a vote of not less than sixty-six per 
cent. of the voting shares, resolves to vest the 
management of the corporate debtor with the resolution 
professional, the resolution professional shall make an 
application for this purpose to the Adjudicating 
Authority, in such form and manner as may be 
specified. 
Vesting 
management of 
corporate debtor 
with resolution 
professional. 
 
 
(2) On an application made under sub-section (1), 
if the Adjudicating Authority is of the opinion that 
 
16 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
during 
the 
pre-packaged 
insolvency 
resolution 
process—  
 
(a) the affairs of the corporate debtor have been 
conducted in a fraudulent manner; or  
 
 
(b) there has been gross mismanagement of the 
affairs of the corporate debtor, 
 
 
it shall pass an order vesting the management of the 
corporate debtor with the resolution professional. 
 
 
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in this Chapter, the provisions of — 
 
 
(a) sub-sections (2) and (2A) of section 14; 
 
 
(b) section 17; 
 
 
(c) clauses (e) to (g) of section 18;  
 
 
(d) sections 19 and 20;  
 
 
(e) sub-section (1) of section 25; 
 
 
(f) clauses (a) to (c) and clause (k) of sub-
section (2) of section 25; and  
 
 
(g) section 28,  
 
 
shall, mutatis mutandis apply, to the proceedings under 
this Chapter, from the date of the order under sub-
section (2), until the pre-packaged insolvency resolution 
process period comes to an end.  
 
Consideration 
and approval of 
resolution plan. 
54K. (1) The corporate debtor shall submit the base 
resolution plan, referred to in clause (c) of sub-section 
(4) of section 54A, to the resolution professional within 
two 
days 
of 
the 
pre-packaged 
insolvency 
commencement date, and the resolution professional 
shall present it to the committee of creditors.  
 
 
(2) The committee of creditors may provide the 
corporate debtor an opportunity to revise the base 
resolution plan prior to its approval under sub-section 
(4) or invitation of prospective resolution applicants 
under sub-section (5), as the case may be.  
 
 
(3) The resolution plans andthe base resolution plan, 
submitted under this section shall conform to the 
requirements referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) of 
section 30, and the provisions of sub-sections (1), (2) 
and (5) of section 30 shall, mutatis mutandis apply, to 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
17 
the proceedings under this Chapter. 
 
(4) The committee of creditors may approve the 
base resolution plan for submission to the Adjudicating 
Authority if it does not impair any claims owed by the 
corporate debtor to the operational creditors.  
 
 
(5) Where — 
 
 
(a) the committee of creditors does not approve 
the base resolution plan under sub-section (4); or 
 
 
(b) the base resolution plan impairs any claims 
owed by the corporate debtor to the operational 
creditors,  
 
 
the resolution professional shall invite prospective 
resolution applicants to submit a resolution plan or 
plans, to compete with the base resolution plan, in such 
manner as may be specified.  
 
 
(6) The resolution applicants submitting resolution 
plans pursuant to invitation under sub-section (5), shall 
fulfil such criteria as may be laid down by the resolution 
professional with the approval of the committee of 
creditors, having regard to the complexity and scale of 
operations of the business of the corporate debtor and 
such other conditions as may be specified.  
 
 
(7) The resolution professional shall provide to the 
resolution applicants, —  
 
 
(a) the basis for evaluation of resolution plans 
for the purposes of sub-section (9), as approved by 
the committee of creditors subject to such conditions 
as may be specified; and  
 
 
(b) the relevant information referred to in section 
29, which shall, mutatis mutandisapply, to the 
proceedings under this Chapter, 
 
 
in such manner as may be specified. 
 
 
(8) The resolution professional shall present to the 
committee of creditors, for its evaluation, resolution 
plans which conform to the requirements referred to in 
sub-section (2) of section 30.  
 
 
(9) The committee of creditors shall evaluate the 
resolution plans presented by the resolution professional 
and select a resolution plan from amongst them. 
 
18 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
(10) Where, on the basis of such criteria as may be 
laid down by it, the committee of creditors decides that 
the resolution plan selected under sub-section (9) is 
significantly better than the base resolution plan, such 
resolution plan may be selected for approval under sub-
section (12): 
 
 
 Provided that the criteria laid down by the 
committee of creditors under this sub-section shall be 
subject to such conditions as may be specified.  
 
 
(11) Where the resolution plan selected under sub-
section (9) is not considered for approval or does not 
fulfil the requirements of sub-section (10), it shall 
compete with the base resolution plan, in such manner 
and subject to such conditions as may be specified, and 
one of them shall be selected for approval under sub-
section (12).  
 
 
(12) The resolution plan selected for approval under 
sub-section (10) or sub-section (11), as the case may be, 
may be approved by the committee of creditors for 
submission to the Adjudicating Authority:  
 
 
Provided that where the resolution plan selected for 
approval under sub-section (11) is not approved by the 
committee of creditors, the resolution professional shall 
file an application for termination of the pre-packaged 
insolvency resolution process in such form and manner 
as may be specified.  
 
 
(13) The approval of the resolution plan under sub-
section (4) or sub-section (12), as the case may be, by 
the committee of creditors, shall be by a vote of not less 
than sixty-six per cent. of the voting shares, after 
considering its feasibility and viability, the manner of 
distribution proposed, taking into account the order of 
priority amongst creditors as laid down in sub-section 
(1) of section 53, including the priority and value of the 
security interest of a secured creditor and such other 
requirements as may be specified. 
 
 
(14) While considering the feasibility and viability 
of a resolution plan, where the resolution plan submitted 
by the corporate debtor provides for impairment of any 
claims owed by the corporate debtor, the committee of 
creditors may require the promoters of the corporate 
debtor to dilute their shareholding or voting or control 
rights in the corporate debtor: 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
19 
 
 Provided that where the resolution plan does not 
provide for such dilution, the committee of creditors 
shall, prior to the approval of such resolution plan under 
sub-section (4) or sub-section (12), as the case may be, 
record reasons for its approval. 
 
 
(15) The resolution professional shall submit the 
resolution plan as approved by the committee of 
creditors under sub-section (4) or sub-section (12), as 
the case may be, to the Adjudicating Authority. 
 
 
Explanation I.––For the removal of doubts, it is 
hereby clarified that, the corporate debtor being a 
resolution applicant under clause (25) of section 5, 
may submit the base resolution plan either 
individually or jointly with any other person.  
 
 
Explanation II.––For the purposes of sub-
sections (4) and (14), claims shall be considered to 
be impaired where the resolution plan does not 
provide for the full payment of the confirmed claims 
as per the updated list of claims maintained by the 
resolution professional. 
 
 
54L. (1) If the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied 
that the resolution plan as approved by the committee of 
creditors under sub-section (4) or sub-section (12) of 
section 54K, as the case may be, subject to the 
conditions provided therein, meets the requirements as 
referred to in sub-section (2) of section 30, it shall, 
within thirty days of the receipt of such resolution plan, 
by order approve the resolution plan: 
Approval 
of 
resolution plan.  
 
 Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall, 
before passing an order for approval of a resolution plan 
under this sub-section, satisfy itself that the resolution 
plan has provisions for its effective implementation. 
 
 
(2) The order of approval under sub-section (1) shall 
have such effect as provided under sub-sections (1), (3) 
and (4) of section 31, which shall, mutatis mutandis 
apply, to the proceedings under this Chapter.  
 
 
(3) Where the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied 
that the resolution plan does not conform to the 
requirements referred to in sub-section (1), it may, 
within thirty days of the receipt of such resolution plan, 
by an order, reject the resolution plan and pass an order 
under section 54N. 
 
 
(4) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary  
20 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
contained in this section, where the Adjudicating 
Authority has passed an order under sub-section (2) of 
section 54J and the resolution plan approved by the 
committee of creditors under sub-section (4) or sub-
section (12), as the case may be, of section 54K, does 
not result in the change in the management or control of 
the corporate debtor to a person who was not a promoter 
or in the management or control of the corporate debtor, 
the Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order —  
 
(a) rejecting such resolution plan;  
 
 
(b) terminating the pre-packaged insolvency 
resolution process and passing a liquidation order in 
respect of the corporate debtor as referred to in sub-
clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of clause (b) of sub-section 
(1) of section 33; and 
 
 
(c) declaring that the pre-packaged insolvency 
resolution process costs, if any, shall be included as 
part of the liquidation costs for the purposes of 
liquidation of the corporate debtor. 
 
Appeal 
against 
order 
under 
section 54L. 
54M. Any appeal from an order approving the 
resolution plan under sub-section (1) of section 54L, 
shall be on the grounds laid down in sub-section (3) of 
section 61. 
 
Termination 
of 
pre-packaged 
insolvency 
resolution 
process. 
54N. (1) Where the resolution professional files an 
application with the Adjudicating Authority, — 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) under the proviso to sub-section (12) of 
section 54K; or 
 
 
(b) under sub-section (3) of section 54D, 
 
 
the Adjudicating Authority shall, within thirty days 
of the date of such application, by an order, — 
 
 
(i) terminate the pre-packaged insolvency 
resolution process; and 
 
 
(ii) provide for the manner of continuation of 
proceedings 
initiated 
for 
avoidance 
of 
transactions under Chapter III or proceedings 
initiated under section 66 and section 67A, if 
any. 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
21 
 
(2) Where the resolution professional, at any time 
after the pre-packaged insolvency commencement date, 
but before the approval of resolution plan under sub-
section (4) or sub-section (12), as the case may be, of 
section 54K, intimates the Adjudicating Authority of the 
decision of the committee of creditors, approved by a 
vote of sixty-six per cent. of the voting shares, to 
terminate the pre-packaged insolvency resolution 
process, the Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order 
under sub-section (1). 
 
 
(3) Where the Adjudicating Authority passes an 
order under sub-section (1), the corporate debtor shall 
bear the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process 
costs, if any. 
 
 
(4) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in this section, where the Adjudicating 
Authority has passed an order under sub-section (2) of 
section 54J and the pre-packaged insolvency resolution 
process is required to be terminated under sub-section 
(1), the Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order — 
 
 
(a) of liquidation in respect of the corporate 
debtor as referred to in sub-clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) 
of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 33; and 
 
 
(b) declare that the pre-packaged insolvency 
resolution process costs, if any, shall be included as 
part of the liquidation costs for the purposes of 
liquidation of the corporate debtor. 
 
 
54-O. (1) The committee of creditors, at any time 
after the pre-packaged insolvency commencement date 
but before the approval of resolution plan under sub-
section (4) or sub-section (12), as the case may be, of 
section 54K, by a vote of sixty-six per cent. of the 
voting shares, may resolve to initiate a corporate 
insolvency resolution process in respect of the corporate 
debtor, if such corporate debtor is eligible for corporate 
insolvency resolution process under Chapter II.  
Initiation 
of 
corporate 
insolvency 
resolution 
process. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained 
in Chapter II, where the resolution 
professional intimates the Adjudicating Authority of the 
decision of the committee of creditors under sub-section 
(1), the Adjudicating Authority shall, within thirty days 
of the date of such intimation, pass an order to — 
 
 
(a) terminate the pre-packaged insolvency  
22 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
resolution process and initiate corporate insolvency 
resolution process under Chapter II in respect of the 
corporate debtor; 
 
(b) appoint the resolution professional referred 
to in under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 
54E as the interim resolution professional, subject to 
submission of written consent by such resolution 
professional to the Adjudicatory Authority in such 
form as may be specified; and 
 
 
(c) declare that the pre-packaged insolvency 
resolution process costs, if any, shall be included as 
part of insolvency resolution process costs for the 
purposes of the corporate insolvency resolution 
process of the corporate debtor. 
 
 
(3) Where the resolution professional fails to submit 
written consent under clause (b) of sub-section (2), the 
Adjudicating Authority shall appoint an interim 
resolution professional by making a reference to the 
Board for recommendation, in the manner as provided 
under section 16. 
 
 
(4) Where the Adjudicating Authority passes an 
order under sub-section (2) — 
 
 
(a) such order shall be deemed to be an order of 
admission of an application under section 7 and 
shall have the same effect; 
 
 
(b) the corporate insolvency resolution process 
shall commence from the date of such order; 
 
 
(c) the proceedings initiated for avoidance of 
transactions under Chapter III or proceedings 
initiated under section 66 and section 67A, if any, 
shall continue during the corporate insolvency 
resolution process;  
 
 
(d) for the purposes of sections 43, 46 and 50, 
references to “insolvency commencement date” 
shall 
mean 
“pre-packaged 
insolvency 
commencement date”; and 
 
 
(e) in computing the relevant time or the period 
for avoidable transactions, the time-period for the 
duration of the pre-packaged insolvency resolution 
process shall also be included, notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in sections 43, 46 
and 50. 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
23 
 
54P. (1) Save as provided under this Chapter, the 
provisions of sections 24, 25A, 26, 27, 28, 29A, 32A, 43 
to 51, and the provisions of Chapters VI and VII of this 
Part shall, mutatis mutandis apply, to the pre-packaged 
insolvency resolution process, subject to the following, 
namely:― 
Application 
of 
provisions 
of 
Chapters II, III, 
VI, and VII to 
this Chapter. 
 
(a) reference to “members of the suspended 
Board of Directors or the partners” under clause (b) 
of sub-section (3) of section 24 shall be construed as 
reference to “members of the Board of Directors or 
the partners,unless an order has been passed by the 
Adjudicating Authority under section 54J”; 
 
 
(b) reference to “clause (j) of sub-section (2) of 
section 25” under section 26 shall be construed as 
reference to “clause (h) of sub-section (2) of section 
54F”; 
 
 
(c) reference to “section 16” under section 27 
shall be construed as reference to “section 54E”; 
 
 
(d) reference to “resolution professional” in sub-
sections (1) and (4) of section 28 shall be construed 
as “corporate debtor”; 
 
 
(e) reference to “section 31” under sub-section 
(3) of section 61 shall be construed as reference to 
“sub-section (1) of section 54L”; 
 
 
(f) reference to “section 14” in sub-sections (1) 
and (2) of section 74 shall be construed as reference 
to “clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 54E”;  
 
 
(g) reference to “section 31” in sub-section (3) 
of section 74 shall be construed as" reference to 
“sub-section (1) of section 54L”. 
 
 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of this 
Chapter and unless the context otherwise requires, 
where the provisions of Chapters II, III, VI and VII are 
applied to the proceedings under this Chapter, 
references to —  
 
 
(a) “insolvency commencement date” shall be 
construed as references to “pre-packaged insolvency 
commencement date”;  
 
 
(b) 
“resolution 
professional” 
or 
“interim 
resolution professional”, as the case may be, shall be 
construed 
as 
references 
to 
the 
resolution 
 
24 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
professional appointed under this Chapter;  
 
(c) “corporate insolvency resolution process” 
shall be construed as references to “pre-packaged 
insolvency resolution process”; and  
 
 
(d) “insolvency resolution process period” shall 
be construed as references to “pre-packaged 
insolvency resolution process period.”.’. 
 
Amendment 
of 
section 61.  
9. In section 61 of the principal Act, for sub-section 
(4), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
 
 
“(4) An appeal against a liquidation order passed 
under section 33, or sub-section (4) of section 54L, or 
sub-section (4) of section 54N, may be filed on grounds 
of material irregularity or fraud committed in relation to 
such a liquidation order. 
 
 
(5) An appeal against an order for initiation of 
corporate insolvency resolution process passed under 
sub-section (2) of section 54-O may be filed on grounds 
of material irregularity or fraud committed in relation to 
such an order.” . 
 
Amendment 
of 
section 65.  
10. In section 65 of the principal Act, after sub-section 
(2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: –– 
 
 
“(3) If, any person initiates the pre-packaged 
insolvency resolution process—  
 
 
(a) fraudulently or with malicious intent for any 
purpose other than for the resolution of insolvency; 
or 
 
 
(b) with the intent to defraud any person,  
 
 
the Adjudicating Authority may impose upon such 
person a penalty which shall not be less than one lakh 
rupees, but may extend to one crore rupees.”. 
 
Insertion of new 
section 67A. 
11. After section 67 of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:–– 
 
Fraudulent 
management 
of 
corporate debtor 
during 
pre-
packaged 
insolvency 
resolution 
process. 
“67A. On and after the pre-packaged insolvency 
commencement date, where an officer of the corporate 
debtor manages its affairs with the intent to defraud 
creditors of the corporate debtor or for any fraudulent 
purpose, the Adjudicating Authority may, on an 
application by the resolution professional, pass an 
order imposing upon any such officer, a penalty which 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
25 
shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend 
to one crore rupees.”. 
 
12. In section 77 of the principal Act, the Explanation 
shall be omitted.  
Omission 
of 
Explanation to 
section 77. 
 
13. After section 77 of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:–– 
Insertion of new 
section 77A. 
 
“77A. (1) Where—  
 
Punishment for 
offences related 
to pre-packaged 
insolvency 
resolution 
process. 
 
(a) a corporate debtor provides any information 
in the application under section 54C which is false 
in material particulars, knowing it to be false 
oromits any material fact, knowing it to be material; 
or 
 
 
(b) a corporate debtor provides any information 
in the list of claims or the preliminary information 
memorandum submitted under sub-section (1) of 
section 54G which is false in material particulars, 
knowing it to be false or omits any material fact, 
knowing it to be material; or  
 
 
(c) any person who knowingly and wilfully 
authorised or permitted the furnishing of such 
information under sub-clauses (a) and (b), 
 
 
such corporate debtor or person, as the case may be, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than three years, but which may extend 
to five years or with fine which shall not be less than 
one lakh rupees, but which may extend to one crore 
rupees, or with both. 
 
 
(2) If a director or partner of the corporate debtor, as 
the case may be, deliberately contravenes the provisions 
of Chapter III-A, such person shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for not less than three years, but which 
may extend to five years, or with fine which shall not be 
less than one lakh rupees, but which may extend to one 
crore rupees, or with both. 
 
 
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, and 
sections 75, 76 and 77, an application shall be deemed 
to be false in material particulars in case the facts 
 
26 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
mentioned or omitted in the application, if true, or not 
omitted from the application as the case may be, would 
have been sufficient to determine the existence of a 
default under this Code.”. 
Amendment 
of 
section 208. 
14. In section 208 of the principal Act,–– 
 
 
(i) after clause (c), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:––  
 
 
“(ca) 
pre-packaged 
insolvency 
resolution 
process under Chapter III-A of Part II;”;  
 
 
(ii) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely:–– 
 
 
“(1A) Where the name of the insolvency 
professional proposed to be appointed as a 
resolution professional, is approved under clause 
(e) of sub-section (2) of section 54A, it shall be the 
function of such insolvency professional to take 
such actions as may be necessary to perform his 
functions and duties prior to the initiation of the 
pre-packaged insolvency resolution process under 
Chapter III-A of Part II.” . 
 
Amendment 
of 
section 239. 
15. In section 239 of the principal Act, in sub-section 
(2),after clause (fc), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:––  
 
 
“(fd) the form, particulars, manner and fee for 
making application before the Adjudicating Authority 
under sub-section (2) of section 54C; 
 
 
(fe) the conditions and restrictions with which the 
promoters, members, personnel and partners of the 
corporate debtor shall exercise and discharge 
contractual or statutory rights and obligations under 
clause (c) of section 54H;”. 
 
Amendment 
of 
section 240. 
16. In section 240 of the principal Act, in sub-section 
(2),––  
 
 
(i) after clause (e), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
 
 
“(ea) the other costs under sub-clause (e) of 
clause (23C) of section 5;”; 
 
 
(ii) after clause (zk), the following clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
27 
 
“(zka)such number of financial creditors and 
the 
manner of proposing the insolvency 
professional, and the form for approving such 
insolvency professional by the financial creditors 
under clause (e), the persons who shall provide 
approval under the proviso to clause (e), the form 
for making a declaration under clause (f) of sub-
section (2) of section 54A; 
 
 
(zkb) the form for obtaining approval from 
financial creditors under sub-section (3), and the 
persons who shall provide approval under the 
proviso to sub-section (3) of section 54A; 
 
 
(zkc) the other conditions for the base 
resolution plan under clause (c), and such 
information and documents under clause (d) of 
sub-section (4) of section 54A; 
 
 
(zkd) the form in which the report is to be 
prepared under clause (a), such reports and other 
documents under clause (b), and such other duties 
under cause (c) of sub-section (1), and the manner 
of determining the fees under sub-section (3) of 
section 54B; 
 
 
(zke) the form for providing written consent of 
the insolvency professional under clause (b), the 
form for declaration under clause (c), the 
information relating to books of account and such 
other documents relating to such period under 
clause (d) of sub-section (3) of section 54C; 
 
 
(zkf) the form and manner for making 
application for termination of the pre-packaged 
insolvency resolution process under sub-section 
(3) of section 54D; 
 
 
(zkg) the form and manner of making public 
announcement under clause (c) of sub-section (1) 
of section 54E; 
 
 
(zkh) the manner of confirming the list of 
claims under clause (a), the manner of informing 
creditors under clause (b), the manner of 
maintaining an updated list of claims under clause 
(c), the form and manner of preparing the 
information memorandum under clause (g), and 
such other duties under clause (i) of sub-section 
(2) of section 54F; 
 
28 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
(zki) such other persons under clause (c), the 
manner of appointing accountants, legal or other 
professionals under clause (e), such other matters 
under sub-clause (iv) of clause (f) and the manner 
of taking other actions under clause (g) of sub-
section (3) of section 54F; 
 
 
(zkj) the manner of determination of fees and 
expenses as may be incurred by the resolution 
professional under sub-section (6) of section 54F; 
 
 
(zkk) manner of bearing fees and expenses 
under sub-section (7) of section 54F; 
 
 
(zkl) the form and manner of list of claims and 
preliminary information memorandum under sub-
section (1) of section 54G; 
 
 
(zkm) the conditions under clause (a) of 
section 54H; 
 
 
(zkn) the manner of alteration of the 
composition of the committee of creditors under 
the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 54I; 
 
 
(zko) the form and manner of making 
application under sub-section (1) of section 54J; 
 
 
(zkp) the manner of inviting prospective 
resolution applicants under sub-section (5) of 
section 54K; 
 
 
(zkq) other conditions under sub-section (6) of 
section 54K; 
 
 
(zkr) the conditions under clause (a) and the 
manner of providing the basis for evaluation of 
resolution plans and the information referred to in 
section 29 under sub-section (7) of section 54K; 
 
 
(zks) the conditions under the proviso to sub-
section (10) of section 54K; 
 
 
(zkt) the manner and conditions under sub-
section (11) of section 54K; 
 
 
(zku) the form and manner of filing application 
under the proviso to sub-section (12) of section 
54K; 
 
 
(zkv) other requirements under sub-section 
(13) of section 54K; 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
29 
 
(zkw) the form for submission of written 
consent under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of 
section 54-O;”. 
 
 
17. In section 240A of the principal Act, in sub-
section (1), after the words “corporate insolvency 
resolution 
process”, 
the 
words 
“or 
pre-packaged 
insolvency resolution process” shall be inserted.  
Amendment of 
section 240A. 
 
 
 
RAM NATH KOVIND, 
President. 
 
 
———— 
 
 
DR. G. NARAYANA RAJU, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD,  NEW DELHI–110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF  PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054. 
 
MGIPMRND—06GI(S3)—04-04-2021. 
JAGANATHA
N ANANTHA 
KUMAR
Digitally signed by 
JAGANATHAN 
ANANTHA KUMAR 
Date: 2021.04.04 
23:18:13 +05'30'
1
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx  II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED  BY  AUTHORITY
lañ  25]                            ubZ fnYyh] eaxyokj] vizSy 13] 2021@pS= 23] 1943 ¼'kd½
No. 25]
NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, APRIL 13, 2021/CHAITRA 23, 1943 (SAKA)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
xxxGIDHxxx
xxxGIDExxx
jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—(,u)04@0007@2003—21
REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—21
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 
New Delhi, the 13th April, 2021/Chaitra 23, 1943 (Saka) 
 
THE COMMISSION FOR AIR QUALITY 
MANAGEMENT IN NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION 
AND ADJOINING AREAS ORDINANCE, 2021 
NO. 4 OF 2021 
  Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-second 
Year of the Republic of India. 
 
An Ordinance to provide for the constitution of the  
Commission for Air Quality Management in National 
Capital Region and Adjoining Areas for better co-ordination, 
research, identification and resolution of  problems 
surrounding the air quality index and  for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-13042021-226580
CG-DL-E-13042021-226580
2 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
 
WHEREAS the Commission for Air Quality Management 
in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas Ordinance, 
2020 was promulgated by the President on the 28thday of 
October, 2020; 
 
 
Ord.13 of 2020. 
 
AND WHEREAS the Bill to replace the Commission for 
Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and 
Adjoining Areas Ordinance, 2020 has not been passed; 
 
 
AND WHEREAS the Commission constituted under 
section 3 of the Commission for Air Quality Management in 
National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas Ordinance, 
2020 was operational, but ceased to exist on account of lapse 
of said Ordinance on the 12thday of March, 2021; 
 
 
AND WHEREAS the continuance of the Commission is 
necessary for effective management of air quality in  the 
National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas; 
 
 
AND WHEREAS Parliament is not in session and the 
President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it 
necessary for him to take immediate action; 
 
 
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred 
by clause (1) of article 123 of the Constitution, the President 
is pleased to promulgate the following Ordinance:— 
 
 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
Short title, 
application and 
commencement. 
1. (1) This Ordinance may be called the Commission for 
Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and 
Adjoining Areas Ordinance, 2021. 
 
 
(2) It shall apply to the National Capital Region and also to 
adjoining areas in so far as it relates to matters concerning 
air pollution in the National Capital Region. 
 
 
 (3) It shall come into force at once. 
 
Definitions. 
2. (1) In this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise 
requires,–– 
 
 
 
 
 (a) “adjoining areas” means the areas in the States of 
Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh, adjoining 
the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the National 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
3 
 
 
 
 
Capital Region, where any source of pollution is located, 
causing adverse impact on air quality in the  National 
Capital Region; 
 
(b) “Associate Member” means a member who is co-
opted  under sub-section (3) of section 3; 
 
 
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the  
Commission for Air Quality Management in National 
Capital Region and Adjoining Areas referred to in 
section 3; 
 
 
(d) “Commission” means the  Commission for Air 
Quality Management in National Capital Region and 
Adjoining Areas constituted under section 3; 
 
 
(e) “Member” means a Member of the Commission 
and includes the Chairperson thereof; 
 
 
 
2 of 1985. 
 (f) “National Capital Region” shall have the same 
meaning as assigned to it in clause (f) of section 2 of the 
National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985; 
 
 
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made 
under this Ordinance. 
 
 
26 of 1986. 
(2) The words used herein and not defined, but defined in 
the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, shall have the 
meaning as assigned to them in that Act. 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
COMMISSION FOR AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT 
IN NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION AND ADJOINING 
AREAS 
 
 
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute a body to be known as the  
Commission for Air Quality Management in National 
Capital Region and Adjoining Areas to exercise the powers 
conferred upon, and to perform the functions assigned to, 
that Commission under this Ordinance. 
Constitution of 
Commission. 
 
   (2) The Commission shall consist of the following 
Members––  
(a) a full-time Chairperson having special knowledge in 
 
4 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
the field of environment protection or pollution control with 
experience of not less than fifteen years or having 
administrative experience of not less than twenty-five years; 
(b) a representative of the Secretary to the Government of 
India in the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change, who shall be an officer not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary, ex officio; 
(c) five ex-officio Members who are either Chief 
Secretaries, or Secretaries in-charge of the department 
dealing with environment protection in the National Capital 
Territory of Delhi and the States of Punjab, Haryana, 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh; 
(d) one full-time member who is or has been a Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India; 
(e) three full-time independent technical Members to be 
appointed from amongst persons having specific scientific 
knowledge and experience in matters relating to air 
pollution; 
(f) one technical member from the Central Pollution 
Control Board, ex officio; 
(g) one technical member to be nominated by the Indian 
Space Research Organisation, ex officio; 
(h) three members from non-Governmental organisations 
having experience in matters concerning combating of air 
pollution; 
(i) one representative of the National Institution for 
Transforming India, not below the rank of Joint Secretary or 
Adviser, ex officio; 
(j) one officer in the rank of Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India to be appointed by the Central 
Government as a full-time Member-Secretary of the 
Commission; 
(k) three members, being stakeholders from such sectors 
as agriculture, industry, transport or construction. 
 
(3) The Commission may co-opt the following persons as 
Associate Members, namely:–– 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
5 
 
 
(a) a representative of the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India; 
(b) a representative of the Ministry of Power, not below 
the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India; 
(c) a representative of the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India; 
(d) a representative of the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India; 
(e) a representative of the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers’ Welfare, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to 
the Government of India; 
 (f) a representative of the Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India; 
(g) a representative of any association of commerce or 
industry; 
(h) such other Associate Members, as may be prescribed. 
 
  (4) 
The 
Member-Secretary 
shall 
be 
the 
Chief 
Coordinating Officer of the Commission and shall assist the 
Commission in the discharge of its functions under this 
Ordinance. 
 
 
 (5) The headquarters of the Commission shall be at Delhi 
and the Commission may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government, establish offices at other places in 
National Capital Region or Adjoining Areas. 
 
 
 (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, and notwithstanding any 
judgment or order of any court, the Commission shall have 
exclusive jurisdiction in the National Capital Region and 
Adjoining Areas in respect of  matters covered by this 
Ordinance and no other body, authority, individual or 
committee shall have any power or jurisdiction in the matters 
 
6 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
covered under this Ordinance: 
 
Provided that the powers, functions and duties of the 
Commission shall not be in derogation of the powers, 
functions and duties of the Central Government, the 
Governments of the National Capital territory of Delhi and 
of the States of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar 
Pradesh, the Central Pollution Control Board, the State 
Pollution Control Boards of the States of Punjab, Haryana, 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh and the Pollution Control 
Committee of the State of Delhi: 
 
 
Provided further that in case of any conflict in the orders 
or directions of the Commission and the Governments of the 
National Capital territory of Delhi and of the States of 
Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradeshor the Central 
Pollution Control Board or the State Pollution Control 
Boards of the States of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar 
Pradesh or the Pollution Control Committee of the State of 
Delhi or any other statutory authority set up or established 
under a State Act, the order or direction of the Commission 
shall prevail. 
 
Appointment of 
Chairperson, 
Members 
and 
Member-
Secretary. 
4. (1) The full-time Chairperson and full-time Members, 
other than ex officio Members, of the Commission shall be 
appointed by the Central Government: 
 
 
Provided that every appointment under this sub-section 
shall, subject to the provisions of second proviso, be made on 
the recommendations of a Selection Committee consisting 
of–– 
 
 
 (a) Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change in the Government of India–– 
Chairperson; 
 (b) Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry in the Government of India –– member; 
(c) Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways in the Government of India –– member; 
(d) Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Science and 
Technology in the Government of India–– member; 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
7 
 
 
(e) Cabinet Secretary–– member: 
 
Provided further that in case where the Central 
Government appoints a serving officer as the Chairperson 
under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 3, or the full-
time 
Member 
under 
clause 
(d) 
thereof, 
then, 
no 
recommendation of the Selection Committee shall be 
required. 
 
 
(2) No appointment of the Chairperson or a Member shall 
be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy of any member 
in the Selection Committee referred to in sub-section (1). 
 
 
(3) The appointment of the Member-Secretary of the 
Commission shall be made by the Central Government in 
such manner, subject to such terms and conditions, as may be 
prescribed. 
 
 
5. (1) The full-time Chairperson or a Member, other than 
an ex officio member, may, by notice in writing under his 
hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office. 
Resignation 
and removal of 
Chairperson 
and Members. 
 
(2) The Central Government may remove the Chairperson 
or any member, other than an ex officio member, from his 
office, in such manner as may be prescribed, if such person-- 
(a) is adjudged an insolvent;  
(b) engages during his term of office in any paid 
employment outside the duties of his office;  
(c) is unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of 
mind or body;  
(d) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a 
competent court;  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance 
in office prejudicial to the public interest;   
(f) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely 
to affect prejudicially his functions; or  
(g) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an 
offence which in the opinion of the Central Government 
involves moral turpitude: 
 
 
   Provided that no such Member shall be so removed, 
 
8 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
unless he has been given an opportunity of being heard. 
Term of office 
of Chairperson 
and Members. 
6. The full-time Chairperson or a Member, other than an 
ex-officio member, shall hold office for a term of three years 
from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he 
attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier, and 
shall be eligible for re-appointment. 
 
Member to act 
as Chairperson 
or to discharge 
his functions in 
certain 
circumstances. 
7. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the 
office of the Chairperson by reason of death, resignation or 
otherwise, the Central Government may, by notification, 
authorise one of the Members to act as the Chairperson until 
the appointment of a new Chairperson to fill such vacancy. 
 
 
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his 
functions owing to absence on leave or otherwise, such one 
of the Members as the Central Government may, by 
notification, authorise in this behalf, shall discharge the 
functions of the Chairperson until the date on which the 
Chairperson resumes his duties. 
 
Terms and 
conditions of 
service of 
Chairperson and 
Members. 
8.  The salaries  and allowances payable to, and the  other  
terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and  
Members, other than ex officio members, shall be such as 
may be prescribed: 
 
 
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the 
other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson or a 
Member shall be varied to his disadvantage after his 
appointment. 
 
Vacancies, etc., 
not to invalidate 
proceedings of 
Commission. 
9. No act or proceedings of the Commission shall be 
invalidated merely on the ground of existence of any 
vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Commission. 
 
Procedure to be 
regulated 
by 
Commission. 
10. (1) The Commission shall meet at such time and place 
as the Chairperson may think fit. 
 
 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Ordinance and the 
rules made thereunder, the Commission shall have the power 
to lay down by regulations its own procedure. 
 
 
(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be 
authenticated by the Member-Secretary or any other officer 
of the Commission duly authorised by the Chairperson in 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
9 
 
 
this behalf. 
 
(4) The Commission may, by general or special order, 
subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be 
specified therein, delegate to the Chairperson, full-time 
member, 
Member-Secretary 
or 
any 
Sub-Committee 
constituted under section 11, such of its powers under this 
Ordinance (except the power to make regulations under 
section 25), as it may deem necessary or expedient for the 
purpose of protecting and improving the quality of the air in 
the Nation Capital Region and Adjoining Areas. 
 
 
11. (1) The Commission shall have at least the following 
three Sub-Committees–– 
(a) Sub-Committee on Monitoring and Identification; 
(b) Sub-Committee on Safeguarding and Enforcement; 
(c) Sub-Committee on Research and Development. 
Sub-
Committees 
and other staff 
of 
Commission. 
 
(2) The Sub-Committee on Monitoring and Identification 
shall be headed by a Member of the Commission chosen by 
it and shall have the following additional members, 
namely:— 
(a) one representative from the Central Pollution Control 
Board;  
(b) one representative each from the State Pollution 
Control Board or Committee, as the case may be, of the 
National Capital territory of Delhi, Punjab, Haryana, 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh; 
(c) one representative from the National Environmental 
Engineering Research Institute; and 
(d) such other members as may be specified by 
regulations.  
 
 
(3) 
The 
Sub-Committee 
on 
Safeguarding 
and 
Enforcement shall be headed by the full-time Chairperson of 
the Commission and shall have the following additional 
members, namely :-  
(a) one representative each, not below the rank of 
Secretary from the department tackling air pollution from the 
National Capital territory of Delhi and the States of Punjab, 
 
10 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh; 
(b) one representative each from the State Pollution 
Control Board or Committee, as the case may be, from 
National Capital territory of Delhi and the States of Punjab, 
Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh; 
(c) one officer not below the rank of Inspector General of 
Police or equivalent from the National Capital territory of 
Delhi and the States of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar 
Pradesh; 
(d) such other members as may be specified by 
regulations. 
 
(4) The Sub-Committee on Research and Development 
shall be headed by a full-time technical member of the 
Commission and shall have the following additional 
members, namely :-  
(a) two technical representatives from the National 
Environmental Engineering Research Institute; 
(b) one technical representative each from research 
institutions or Universities or colleges or organisations in the 
National Capital territory of Delhi and in the States of 
Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh; 
(c) two technical representatives from the field of 
medicine and research working or studying on the impact of 
air pollution on living beings; 
(d) such other members as may be specified by 
regulations. 
 
 
(5) The Commission may also constitute such other Sub-
Committees as it thinks fit. 
 
 
(6) The members of the Sub-Committees, other than ex 
officio members, shall be paid such allowances as may be 
prescribed. 
 
 
(7) The Central Government, in consultation with the 
Commission, shall determine the nature and the categories of 
officers and other staff required to assist the Commission in 
the discharge of its function and provide the Commission 
with such officers and employees as it may deem fit.  
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
11 
 
 
 
(8) The officers and other staff of the Commission shall 
discharge their duties and functions under the General 
Superintendence of the Chairperson. 
 
 
(9) The salaries, allowances and conditions of service of 
the officers and other staff appointed under sub-section (7) 
shall be such as may be prescribed. 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION 
 
 
12. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
law for the time being in force, the Commission shall have 
the power to take all such measures, issue directions and 
entertain complaints, as it deems necessary or expedient for 
the purpose of protecting and improving the quality of the air 
in the National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas and 
shall also have the duty to take all such measures as may 
become necessary for protecting and improving the quality 
of the air in the National Capital Region and Adjoining 
Areas.  
Powers and 
functions of 
Commission. 
 
 
 
. 
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of 
sub-section (1), the Commission shall, for the purposes of 
sub-section (1), have the following powers to perform its 
duties, including taking measures to abate air pollution and to 
regulate or prohibit activities that are likely to cause or 
increase air pollution in the National Capital Region and 
Adjoining Areas, namely:––– 
 (i) co-ordination of actions by the Governments of the 
National Capital territory of Delhi and the States of Punjab, 
Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh, officers and other 
authorities under this Ordinance or the rules made thereunder 
or under any other law for the time being in force, which is 
relatable to the objects of this Ordinance;  
(ii) planning and execution of a programme for the region 
for the prevention, control and abatement of air pollution;  
(iii) laying down parameters for the quality of air in its 
various aspects;  
(iv) laying down parameters for emission or discharge of 
environmental pollutants from various sources whatsoever 
 
12 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
that have implications on air quality in the region:  
Provided that different parameters for emission or 
discharge may be laid down under this clause from different 
sources having regard to the quality or composition of the 
emission or discharge of environmental pollutants from such 
sources that have implications on air quality in the region;  
(v) restriction of areas in which any industries, operations 
or processes or class of industries, operations or processes, 
that have implications on air quality in the region, shall not be 
carried out or shall be carried out subject to certain 
safeguards;  
(vi) carrying out and requiring investigations and research 
relating to problems of environmental pollution that have 
implications on air quality in the region; 
(vii) inspection of any premises, plant, equipment, 
machinery, manufacturing or other processes, materials or 
substances and giving, by order, of such directions to such 
authorities, officers or persons as it may consider necessary to 
take steps for the prevention, control and abatement of air 
pollution in the region;  
(viii) collection and dissemination of information in 
respect of matters relating to air pollution in the region;  
(ix) preparation of manuals, codes or guides relating to the 
prevention, control and abatement of air pollution in the 
region; 
(x) appoint officers, with prior approval of the Central 
Government, with such designations as it thinks fit for the 
purposes of this Ordinance and may entrust to them such of 
the powers and functions under this Ordinance or for the 
purposes of achieving the objects of this Ordinance as it may 
deem fit.  
(xi) issue directions in writing to any person, officer or 
any authority and such person, officer or authority shall be 
bound to comply with such directions.  
Explanation.—For avoidance of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that the power to issue directions under this section 
includes the power to direct—  
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
13 
 
 
(a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any industry, 
operation or process; or  
(b) stoppage or regulation of the supply of electricity or 
water or any other service. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) (a) Subject to the provisions of this section, any person 
authorised by the Commission in this behalf shall have a right 
to enter, at all reasonable times and with such assistance as he 
considers necessary, any place, for the purpose of —  
(i) performing any of the functions of the Commission 
entrusted to him;  
(ii) determining whether and if so in what manner, any 
such functions are to be performed or whether any provisions 
of this Ordinance or the rules made thereunder or any notice, 
order, direction or authorisation served, made, given or 
granted under this Ordinance is being or has been complied 
with;  
(iii) examining and testing any equipment, industrial plant, 
record, register, document or any other material object or for 
conducting a search of any building in which he has reasons 
to believe that an offence under this Ordinance or the rules 
made thereunder has been or is being or is about to be 
committed and for seizing any such equipment, industrial 
plant, record, register, document or other material object if he 
has reasons to believe that it may furnish evidence of the 
Commission of an offence punishable under this Ordinance or 
the rules made thereunder or that such seizure is necessary to 
prevent or mitigate environmental pollution.  
(b) every person carrying on any industry, operation or 
process or handling any hazardous substance shall be bound 
to render all assistance to the person empowered by the 
Commission under clause (a) for carrying out the functions 
under that clause and if he fails to do so without any 
reasonable cause or excuse, he shall be guilty of an offence 
under this Ordinance.  
(c) if any person willfully delays or obstructs any person 
authorised by the Commission under clause (a) in the 
performance of his functions, he shall be guilty of an offence 
under this Ordinance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
 
 
 
 
(d) the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 shall apply to any search or seizure under this section as 
they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority 
of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code or, as 
the case may be, under the corresponding provisions of the 
said law.  
 
2 of 1974. 
 
(4) (a) The Commission or any officer authorised by it in 
this behalf, shall, for the purpose of analysis, have power to 
take samples of air from any factory, premises or other place 
in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(b) the result of any analysis of a sample taken under 
clause (a) shall not be admissible in evidence in any legal 
proceeding unless the provisions of clauses (c) and (d) are 
complied with.  
(c) subject to the provisions of clause (d), the person 
taking the sample under clause (a) shall,—  
(i) serve on the occupier or his agent or person in charge 
of the place, a notice, then and there, in such form as may be 
prescribed, of his intention to have it so analysed;  
(ii) in the presence of the occupier or his agent or person, 
collect a sample for analysis;  
(iii) cause the sample to be placed in a container or 
containers which shall be marked and sealed and shall also be 
signed both by the person taking the sample and the occupier 
or his agent or person;  
(iv) send without delay, the container or the containers to 
the laboratory established or recognised by the Central 
Government; 
(d) when a sample is taken for analysis under clause (a) 
and the person taking the sample serves on the occupier or his 
agent or person, a notice under sub-clause (i) of clause (c), 
then,—  
(i) in a case where the occupier, his agent or person 
wilfully absents himself, the person taking the sample 
shall collect the sample for analysis to be placed in a 
container or containers which shall be marked and 
sealed and shall also be signed by the person taking the 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
15 
 
 
sample; and  
(ii) in a case where the occupier or his agent or person 
present at the time of taking the sample refuses to sign 
the marked and sealed container or containers of the 
sample as required under sub-clause (iii) of clause (c), 
the marked and sealed container or containers shall be 
signed by the person taking the samples,  
and the container or containers shall be sent without delay by 
the person taking the sample for analysis to the laboratory 
established or recognised by the Central Government and 
such person shall inform the Government Analyst appointed 
or recognised, about the wilful absence of the occupier or his 
agent or person, or, as the case may be, his refusal to sign the 
container or containers. 
 
(5) In discharge of its functions and exercising of its 
authority, 
the 
Commission 
and 
the 
Sub-Committees 
mentioned in section 11 shall be bound by such general or 
specific directions of the Central Government, as may be 
issued from time to time.  
 
 
(6) For removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that 
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, and notwithstanding any judgment or 
order of any court, and subject to the provisions of this 
Ordinance, the Commission shall have exclusive jurisdiction 
in respect of matters covered by this Ordinance and no other 
body or authority or committee or individual shall have any 
power or jurisdiction in that matter. 
 
 
(7) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing provisions, the Commission shall perform all or 
any of the following functions, namely:–– 
 
 
(a) take up matters suomotu, or on the basis of complaints 
made by any individual, representative body or organisation 
functioning in the field of environment, against any 
individual, association, company, public undertaking or local 
body carrying on any industry, operation or process; 
 
 
(b) provide the mechanism and the means to implement  in 
the National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas – 
 
16 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
 
(i) the National Clean Air Programme;  
(ii) the National Air Quality Monitoring Programme;   
(iii) the National Ambient Air Quality Standards; 
 
 
(c) provide an effective framework and platform in the 
National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas for –  
 
 
(i) source identification of air pollutants on a periodic 
basis;  
(ii) taking on-ground steps for curbing air pollution; 
(iii) specific research and development in the field of air 
pollution; 
(iv) synergising the energies and efforts of all stakeholders 
in developing innovative ways to monitor, enforce and 
research on the issues concerning air pollution; 
(v) building a network between technical institutions 
working or researching in the field of air pollution; 
(vi) international co-operation including sharing of 
international best practices in the field of air pollution; 
(vii) training and creating a special work-force for tackling 
the problem of air pollution; 
 
 
(d) provide an effective frame work, action plan and take 
appropriate steps for – 
 
 
(i) tackling the problem of stubble burning; 
(ii) monitoring, assessing and inspecting air polluting 
agents; 
(iii) increasing plantation; 
 
 
(e) monitoring the measures taken by the States to prevent 
stubble burning; 
 
 
(f) undertake and promote research in the field of air 
pollution; 
 
 
(g) spread awareness regarding air pollution among 
various sections of society and promote awareness of the 
collective steps that the public may take through publications, 
the media, seminars and other available means; 
 
 
(h) 
encourage 
the 
efforts 
of 
non-governmental  
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
17 
 
 
organisations and institutions working in the field of air 
pollution; 
 
(i) any other functions as have been entrusted to any 
adhoc committee or commission or task force or body formed 
for the purpose of dealing with issues concerning air 
pollution, stubble burning or the monitoring of related factors, 
in pursuance of any judicial order passed for the time being in 
force; 
 
 
(j) such other functions as it may consider necessary for 
the prevention of air pollution in the National Capital Region 
and Adjoining Areas. 
 
 
13. (1) The Commission shall furnish to the Central 
Government an annual report containing such details of the 
steps taken, proposals made, researches awaited and other 
measures undertaken by it in pursuance of its functions under 
section 12, in such form and manner as may be specified by 
regulations. 
Annual report. 
 
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report 
furnished under sub-section (1) to be laid before each House 
of the Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14. (1) Any non-compliance or contravention of any 
provisions of this Ordinance, rules made thereunder or any 
order or direction issued by the Commission, shall be an 
offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend upto five years or with fine which may extend upto 
one crore rupees or with both. 
Penalty for 
contravention 
of provisions 
of Ordinance, 
rules, order or 
direction. 
 
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply 
to any farmer for causing air pollution by stubble burning or 
mismanagement of agricultural residue. 
 
 
 
2 of 1974. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, the offence under this Ordinance 
shall be non-cognizable and shall be triable by the Judicial 
Magistrate of the First Class who shall not take cognizance of 
the offence except upon a complaint made by the Commission 
or any officer authorised by the Commission in this behalf. 
 
 
(3) Where any offence under this Ordinance has been 
committed by a company, every person who, at the time the 
 
18 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
offence was committed, was directly in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of 
the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly:  
 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall 
render any such person liable to any punishment provided in 
this Ordinance, if he proves that the offence was committed 
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence 
to prevent the commission of such offence.  
 
 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), 
where an offence under this Ordinance has been committed 
by a company and it is proved that the offence has been 
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such 
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also deemed 
to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly.  
 
 
Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-sections (3) and 
(4),—  
(a) “company” means any body corporate, and includes a 
firm or other association of individuals; and  
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 
 
 
(5) Where an offence under this Ordinance has been 
committed by any Department of Government, the Head of 
the Department shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
 
 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall 
render such Head of the Department liable to any punishment 
if he proves that the offence was committed without his 
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent 
the commission of such offence.  
 
 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), 
where an offence under this Ordinance has been committed 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
19 
 
 
by a Department of Government and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance 
of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any officer, 
other than the Head of the Department, such officer shall also 
be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
 
 
 
2 of 1974. 
(7) For the purpose of this section and the procedure to be 
followed thereunder, the provisions of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, shall apply. 
 
 
15. 
The 
Commission 
may 
impose 
and 
collect 
Environmental Compensation from farmers causing air 
pollution by stubble burning, at such rate and in such manner, 
as may be prescribed. 
Environmental 
Compensation. 
 
CHAPTER IV 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
 
 
16. (1) The Central Government shall, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay 
to the Commission by way of grants such sums of money as 
the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for 
the purposes of this Ordinance. 
Grants by 
Central 
Government. 
 
(2) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit 
for performing the functions under this Ordinance, and such 
sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants 
referred to in sub-section (1). 
 
 
17. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts 
and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of 
accounts in such form as may be prescribed by  the Central 
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. 
Accounts and 
audit. 
 
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by 
the Comptroller and Auditor-General at such intervals as may 
be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in 
connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
 
 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person 
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts 
of the Commission under this Ordinance shall have the same 
 
20 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
rights and privileges and the authority in connection with such 
audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in 
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in 
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and 
papers  and to inspect any of the offices of the Commission. 
 
(4) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General or any other person 
appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report 
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central 
Government by the Commission and the Central Government 
shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is received, before each House of Parliament. 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Appeal. 
18. An appeal shall lie only to the National Green Tribunal 
constituted under the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 against 
any order, direction or action taken by or on behalf of the 
Commission constituted under section 3 of this Ordinance. 
 
 
19 of 2010. 
Constitution of 
special 
investigation 
teams. 
19. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law  
for the time being in force or any judicial order by any Court, 
where the Commission considers it necessary so to do, it 
may constitute one or more special investigation teams, 
consisting of such officers or such persons, as it thinks 
necessary, for purposes of carrying out its functions under 
this Ordinance. 
 
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
issue direction. 
20.Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, but subject to the provision of 
this Ordinance, the Central Government may issue in writing 
such direction, as it deems fit, to the Commission or any 
person, officer or authority authorised by the Commission, 
and the Commission, person, or authority, as the case may 
be, shall be bound to comply with such direction. 
 
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
call for 
information. 
21. The Central Government may, from time to time, call 
for such information and reports from the Commission, as it 
deems fit and the Commission shall be bound to provide 
such information and report.  
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
21 
 
 
 
22. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any 
suit, proceeding or dispute pertaining to or arising out of the 
actions taken or directions issued by the Commission in 
respect of any matter which the Commission is empowered by 
or under this Ordinance, except the National Green Tribunal 
referred to in section 18.  
Bar of 
jurisdiction. 
 
23. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government, the State Government, the Commission, 
or any Member thereof, or any person acting under the 
direction 
either 
of 
the 
Central 
Government, 
State 
Government, or the Commission in respect of anything which 
is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of 
this Ordinance or of any rules or any order made thereunder.  
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 of 1860. 
24. Every Member of the Commission and every officer 
appointed or authorised by the Commission to exercise 
functions under this Ordinance shall be deemed to be a public 
servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code. 
Members and 
officers to be 
public 
servants. 
 
25.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Ordinance. 
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
make rules. 
 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of 
the following matters, namely:- 
 
 
(a) the other Associate Members under clause (h) of sub-
section (3) of section 3; 
 
 
(b) the manner of removal of Chairperson or a Member 
under sub-section (2) of section 5; 
 
 
(c) the salaries  and allowances payable to, and the  other  
terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and  
Members under sub-section (1) of section 8; 
 
 
(d) the allowance payable to the members, other than ex 
officio members of the Sub-Committees, under sub-section 
(6) of section 11; 
 
 
(e) the appointment of  such officers and other staff under 
sub-section (7) of section 11; 
 
22 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
 
(f) the salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the 
officers and other staff under sub-section (9) of section 11; 
 
 
(g) the manner of taking samples under clause (a), and the 
form of notice under sub-clause (i) of clause (c), of sub-
section (4) of section 12; 
 
 
(h) the rate at which, and the manner in which,  the 
Environmental Compensation shall be imposed  and collected 
under section 15; 
 
 
(i) the form in which annual statement of accounts shall be 
prepared under sub-section (1) of section 17; 
 
 
(j) any other matter which has to be, or may be, 
prescribed. 
 
 
(3) Every rule made under this Ordinance shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule. 
 
Power of 
Commission to 
make 
regulations. 
26. (1) Subject to the provisions of this  Ordinance and the 
rules made thereunder, the Commission may, with the 
previous approval of the Central Government, by notification, 
make regulations to carry out the provisions of this 
Ordinance. 
 
 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or 
any of the following matters, namely:–– 
 
 
(a) the procedure to be followed by the Commission under 
sub-section (2) of section 10; 
 
 
(b) the conditions and limitations subject to which power 
may be delegated by the Commission under sub-section (4), 
of section 10; 
 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
23 
 
 
 
(c) the members of each Sub-Committee under sub-
sections (2), (3) and (4) of section 11; 
 
 
(d) the form and the manner of furnishing annual report 
under section 13; 
 
 
(e) any other matter which has to be, or may be, specified 
by regulations. 
 
 
(3) Every regulation made by the Commission under this  
Ordinance shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a 
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not 
be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that regulation. 
 
 
27. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the 
provisions of this Ordinance, the Central Government may, 
by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Ordinance as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty. 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as 
may be after it is made, be laid before each House of 
Parliament. 
 
 
28. (l) The provisions of this Ordinance shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in 
any other law for the time being in force, any document, 
judgement, order, bye-law, rule, regulation, notification 
having the force of law in the territory of India. 
Ordinance to 
have 
overriding 
effect. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force or any judgement or any order of 
any Court and subject to the provisions of this Ordinance, 
upon the notification of the constitution of the Commission 
under section 3, no other individual or body or authority 
 
24 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
[PART II— 
 
 
 
RAM NATH KOVIND, 
President. 
 
 
———— 
 
 
DR. G. NARAYANA RAJU, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
 
 
constituted either under a law enacted by Parliament, or by a 
State, or appointed or nominated in terms of any judicial 
order, shall act upon or have jurisdiction in relation to the 
matters covered by this Ordinance. 
Repeal and 
savings of order 
constituting 
Environment 
Pollution 
(Prevention and 
Control) 
Authority for 
National Capital 
Region. 
29. (1) The Order made under section 3 of the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 constituting the 
Environment Pollution (Prevention and Control) Authority 
for the National Capital Region vide notification number 
S.O.93(E), dated the 29th January, 1998 is hereby repealed 
and the Environment Pollution (Prevention and Control) 
Authority for the National Capital Region is hereby 
dissolved. 
 
29 of  1986. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any 
action taken by the Environment Pollution (Prevention and 
Control) Authority for the National Capital Region under the 
said Order, shall be deemed to have been done or taken 
under the corresponding provisions of this Ordinance. 
 
Savings. 
30. Notwithstanding the cessation of the Commission for 
Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and 
Adjoining Areas Ordinance, 2020, anything done or any 
action taken under the Ordinance so ceased, shall be deemed 
to have been done or taken under the corresponding 
provisions of this Ordinance. 
 
 
Ord. 13 of 
2020. 
SEC. 1] 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 
25 
 
 
 
CORRIGENDA 
 
             In the Tribunal Reforms (Rationalisation and Conditions of Service) Ordinance, 2021  
(2 of 2021), as Published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 1, dated the 4th April, 
2021, Issue No.20,— 
 
(i) 
at page 3, in line 7, for “3.”, read “4.”; 
 
(ii) 
 at page 5, in line 22, for “word”, read “words”; 
 
(iii) 
at page 7, in line 26, for “AIRPORT”, read “AIRPORTS”; 
 
(iv) 
at page 22,in line 5, for “(Act 55 of 1994)”, read “(55 of 1994)”.                                                                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD,  NEW DELHI–110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF  PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054. 
 
MGIPMRND—126GI(S3)—13-04-2021. 
 
SUBIR 
NARAYAN 
GARAI
Digitally signed by 
SUBIR NARAYAN GARAI 
Date: 2021.04.13 
21:56:37 +05'30'
1
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx  II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED  BY  AUTHORITY
lañ  27]                            ubZ fnYyh] o`gLifrokj] vizSy 22] 2021@oS'kk[k 2] 1943 ¼'kd½
No. 27]
NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, APRIL 22, 2021/VAISAKHA 2, 1943 (SAKA)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
xxxGIDHxxx
xxxGIDExxx
jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—(,u)04@0007@2003—21
REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—21
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi the 22nd April, 2021 / Vaisakha 2, 1943 (Saka)
THE INDIAN MEDICINE CENTRAL COUNCIL (AMENDMENT)
ORDINANCE, 2021
No. 5 of 2021
Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of
India.
An Ordinance further to amend the Indian Medicine Council Act, 1970.
WHEREAS Parliament is not in session and the President is satisfied that circumstances
exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action;
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of article 123 of
the Constitution, the President is pleased to promulgate the following Ordinance:—
1. (1) This Ordinance may be called the Indian Medicine Council (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Short title and
commencement.
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-22042021-226716
CG-DL-E-22042021-226716
2. In section 3A of the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970, in sub-section (2),
for the words “within a period of one year”, the words “within a period of two years” shall
be substituted.
RAM NATH KOVIND,
President.
————
DR. G. NARAYANA RAJU,
Secretary to the Govt. of India.
Amendment
of section 3A.
48 of 1970.
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT  OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
MGIPMRND—135GI—22-04-2021.
2
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[PART II— SEC. 1]
SUBIR 
NARAYAN 
GARAI
Digitally signed by 
SUBIR NARAYAN GARAI 
Date: 2021.04.22 
19:18:12 +05'30'
1
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx  II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED  BY  AUTHORITY
lañ  29]                            ubZ fnYyh] jfookj] ebZ 16] 2021@oS'kk[k 26] 1943 ¼'kd½
No. 29]
NEW DELHI, SUNDAY, MAY 16, 2021/VAISAKHA 26, 1943 (SAKA)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
xxxGIDHxxx
xxxGIDExxx
jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—(,u)04@0007@2003—21
REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—21
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi the 16th May, 2021 / Vaisakha 26, 1943 (Saka)
THE HOMOEOPATHY CENTRAL COUNCIL (AMENDMENT)
ORDINANCE, 2021
NO. 6 OF 2021
Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India.
An Ordinance further to amend the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973.
WHEREAS Parliament is not in session and the President is satisfied that circumstances
exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action;
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of article 123 of
the Constitution, the President is pleased to promulgate the following Ordinance:—
1. (1) This Ordinance may be called the Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Short title and
commencement.
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-16052021-226997
CG-DL-E-16052021-226997
2. In section 3A of the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973, in sub-section (2), for
the words “within a period of three years”, the words “within a period of four years” shall be
substituted.
RAM NATH KOVIND,
President.
————
ANOOP KUMAR MENDIRATTA,
Secretary to the Govt. of  India.
Amendment
of section 3A.
59 of 1973.
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT  OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
MGIPMRND—173GI—16-05-2021.
2
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[PART II— SEC. 1]
SUBIR 
NARAYAN 
GARAI
Digitally signed by 
SUBIR NARAYAN 
GARAI 
Date: 2021.05.16 
20:55:02 +05'30'
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx  II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED  BY  AUTHORITY
lañ   30]
ubZ fnYyh] cq/kokj] twu 30] 2021@vk"kk<+ 9] 1943 ¼'kd½
No. 30]
 NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, JUNE 30, 2021/ASADHA 9, 1943 (SAKA)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—(,u)04@0007@2003—20
REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—20
xxxGIDHxxx
xxxGIDExxx
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 30th June, 2021/Asadha 9, 1943  (Saka)
THE ESSENTIAL DEFENCE SERVICES ORDINANCE, 2021
No. 7 OF 2021
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-30062021-228004
CG-DL-E-30062021-228004
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-30062021-228004
CG-DL-E-30062021-228004
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-30062021-228004
CG-DL-E-30062021-228004
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-30062021-228004
CG-DL-E-30062021-228004
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-30062021-228004
CG-DL-E-30062021-228004
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-30062021-228004
CG-DL-E-30062021-228004
14 of 1947.
SEC. 1]
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
3
4
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[PART II—
SEC. 1]
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
5
6
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[PART II—
SEC. 1]
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
7
14 of 1947.
RAM  NATH  KOVIND,
President.
————
ANOOP  KUMAR  MENDIRATTA,
Secretary to the Govt. of  India.
MGIPMRND—249GI—30-06-2021.
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD,  NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF  PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
9
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[PART II— SEC. 1]
JAGANATHA
N ANANTHA 
KUMAR
Digitally signed by 
JAGANATHAN 
ANANTHA KUMAR 
Date: 2021.06.30 
18:21:45 +05'30'
1
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx  II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED  BY  AUTHORITY
lañ  53]                            ubZ fnYyh] c`gLifrokj] flrEcj 30] 2021@vkf'ou 8] 1943 ¼'kd½
No. 53]
NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 30, 2021/ASVINA 8, 1943 (SAKA)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
xxxGIDHxxx
xxxGIDExxx
jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—(,u)04@0007@2003—21
REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—21
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 30th September, 2021 / Asvina 8, 1943 (Saka)
THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES
(AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 2021
NO. 8 OF 2021
Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of
India.
An Ordinance further to amend the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1985.
WHEREAS the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 was amended
by the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Amendment) Act, 2014 which,
inter alia, introduced a new clause (viiia) in section 2 and renumbered existing clause (viiia)
relating to definition of "illicit traffic" as clause (viiib) thereof, but due to oversight the
reference of the said clause could not be corrected in section 27A of the said Act, which
provides for punishment for financing "illicit traffic" and harbouring offenders;
AND WHEREAS the amendment does not create any new offence but contains a
legislative declaration that reference of clause (viiia) always meant the corresponding
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-30092021-230086
CG-DL-E-30092021-230086
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-30092021-230086
CG-DL-E-30092021-230086
renumbered provision in clause (viiib) and the amendment seeks to rectify this anomaly by
making changes in section 27 of the said Act in order to carry out the legislative intent of the
statute, which has always been to read clause (viiib) in section 27, and already stood
therein;
AND WHEREAS the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Amendment) Act,
2014 came into force on the 1st day of May, 2014;
AND WHEREAS Parliament is not in session and the President is satisfied that
circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action;
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers confirmed by clause (1) of article 123 of the
Constitution, the President is pleased to promulgate the following Ordinance:-
1. (1) This Ordinance may be called the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of May, 2014.
2. In section 27A of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985, for
the words, brackets, letters and figure "clause (viiia) of section 2", the words, brackets,
letters and figure "clause (viiib) of section 2" shall be substituted.
RAM NATH KOVIND,
President.
————
ANOOP KUMAR MENDIRATTA,
Secretary to the Govt. of  India.
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT  OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
MGIPMRND—837GI(S3)—30-09-2021.
2
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[PART II— SEC. 1]
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section
27A of Act 61
of 1985.
SUBIR 
NARAYAN 
GARAI
Digitally signed by 
SUBIR NARAYAN 
GARAI 
Date: 2021.09.30 
22:57:34 +05'30'
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 14th November, 2021/Kartika 23, 1943 (Saka)
THE CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION (AMENDMENT)
ORDINANCE, 2021
(NO. 9 OF  2021)
Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-second Year of  the Republic of India.
An Ordinance further to amend the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003.
WHEREAS Parliament is not in session and the President is satisfied that
circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action;
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of article 123 of
the Constitution, the President is pleased to promulgate the following Ordinance:—
1. (1) This Ordinance may be called the Central Vigilance Commission
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Short title and
commencement.
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx  II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED  BY  AUTHORITY
lañ  54]
ubZ fnYyh] jfookj] uoEcj 14] 2021@ dkfrZd 23] 1943 ¼'kd½
No. 54]
NEW DELHI, SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2021/KARTIKA 23, 1943 (SAKA)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
xxxGIDHxxx
xxxGIDExxx
jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—(,u)04@0007@2003—21
REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—21
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-14112021-231129
CG-DL-E-14112021-231129
MGIPMRND—1031GI—14-11-2021.
2.  In section 25 of the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003, in clause (d), the
following provisos shall be inserted, namely,—
“Provided that the period for which the Director of  Enforcement holds the
office on his initial appointment may, in public interest, on the recommendation of
the Committee under clause(a) and for the reasons to be recorded in writing, be
extended up to one year at a time:
Provided further that no such extension shall be granted after the completion of
a period of  five years in total including the period mentioned in the initial
appointment;”.
RAM  NATH  KOVIND,
President.
————
DR. REETA VASISHTA,
Secretary to the Govt. of  India.
2
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[PART II— SEC. 1]
Amendment
of section 25.
45 of 2003.
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT  OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
JAGANATHA
N ANANTHA 
KUMAR
Digitally signed by 
JAGANATHAN 
ANANTHA KUMAR 
Date: 2021.11.14 
12:54:03 +05'30'
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 14th November, 2021/Kartika 23, 1943 (Saka)
THE DELHI SPECIAL POLICE ESTABLISHMENT
(AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 2021
(NO. 10 OF  2021)
Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of  India.
An Ordinance further to amend the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946.
WHEREAS Parliament is not in session and the President is satisfied that
circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action;
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of article 123 of
the Constitution, the President is pleased to promulgate the following Ordinance:—
1. (1) This Ordinance may be called the Delhi Special Police Establishment
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In section 4B of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946, in sub-
section (1), the following provisos shall be inserted, namely,—
"Provided that the period for which the Director holds the office on his
initial appointment may, in public interest, on the recommendation of the Committee
Short title and
commencement.
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx  II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED  BY  AUTHORITY
lañ  55]
ubZ fnYyh] jfookj] uoEcj 14] 2021@ dkfrZd 23] 1943 ¼'kd½
No. 55]
NEW DELHI, SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2021/KARTIKA 23, 1943 (SAKA)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
xxxGIDHxxx
xxxGIDExxx
jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—(,u)04@0007@2003—21
REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—21
25 of 1946.
Amendment
of section 4.
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-14112021-231130
CG-DL-E-14112021-231130
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-14112021-231130
CG-DL-E-14112021-231130
MGIPMRND—1032GI—14-11-2021.
under sub-section (1) of section 4A and for the reasons to be recorded in writing,
be extended up to one year at a time:
Provided further that no such extension shall be granted after the completion of
a period of five years in total including the period mentioned in the initial appointment;".
RAM  NATH  KOVIND,
President.
————
DR. REETA VASISHTA,
Secretary to the Govt. of  India.
2
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[PART II— SEC. 1]
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT  OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
JAGANATHAN 
ANANTHA 
KUMAR
Digitally signed by 
JAGANATHAN 
ANANTHA KUMAR 
Date: 2021.11.14 
12:58:30 +05'30'
