Central Ordinance 2023 
 
1. THE GOVERNMENT OF NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI (AMENDMENT) 
ORDINANCE, 2023 
THE GOVERNMENT OF NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF
DELHI (AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 2023
NO. 1 OF 2023
Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India.
An Ordinance further to amend the Government of  National Capital Territory
of  Delhi Act, 1991.
WHEREAS Delhi being the Capital of India had been administered by the President of
India directly. A sui generis status was, however, conferred upon Delhi whereby it was
retained as Union territory but with legislature.
AND WHEREAS, Article 239AA came to be introduced into the Constitution of India
providing for various functional-administrative networked issues balancing the legitimate
participation of the Union Government while conferring democratic existence of a legislature
and a Council of Ministers having curtailed powers.
AND WHEREAS, keeping in mind various reports of various Commissions and since
Delhi is the capital city of the nation, the Constitution retained certain exclusive and plenary
jurisdiction in the Parliament while incorporating Article 239 AA in general and Article
239AA[3][b] read with Article 239AA[7] in particular.
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 19th May, 2023/Vaisakha 29, 1945  (Saka)
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx  II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED  BY  AUTHORITY
lañ   12]
ubZ fnYyh] 'kqØokj] ebZ 19] 2023@oS'kk[k 29] 1945 ¼'kd½
No. 12]
NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, MAY 19, 2023/VAISAKHA 29, 1945 (SAKA)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
xxxGIDHxxx
xxxGIDExxx
jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—(,u)04@0007@2003—23
REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-19052023-245962
CG-DL-E-19052023-245962
2
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[PART II—
AND WHEREAS, several important National and international institutions and
authorities like the President, the Parliament, the Supreme Court, etc. and various
constitutional functionaries, etc., as well as all foreign diplomatic missions, international
agencies, etc., are located in Delhi. It is also a place to which high dignitaries from other
nations pay official visits frequently and it is in the national interest that the highest
possible standards should be maintained in the administration and governance of the
national capital.
AND WHEREAS, any decision taken or any event in the capital of the nation not only
affects the residents of the national capital but also the rest of the country and at the same
time has the potential of putting the national reputation, image, credibility and prestige at
stake in the international global spectrum.
AND WHEREAS, the national capital belongs to the entire nation and the entire
nation is vitally interested in the governance of the national capital. It is in the larger
national interest that the people of entire country have some role in the administration of
the national capital through the democratically elected Central Government.
AND WHEREAS, Delhi as the national capital has a unique status and certain
distinguishing features. There is a need to promote the national interests without
compromising on the democratic aspirations of the residents of Delhi.
AND WHEREAS, Article 1 of the Constitution declares that India, that is Bharat, shall
be a Union of States and Union territories specified in the First Schedule;
AND, WHEREAS, clause (1) of article 239 empowers the President to administer
every Union territory, to such extent as he thinks fit, acting through an administrator appointed
by him with such designation as he may specify.
AND, WHEREAS, clause (1) of article 239AA of the Constitution, inter alia, mandates
that the administrator of the Union territory of Delhi, shall be designated as the Lieutenant
Governor of the National Capital Territory of Delhi.
AND WHEREAS, in absence of any Parliamentary legislation dealing with the subject
of services as contained in Entry 41 of List II of the Seventh Schedule in the National Capital
Territory of Delhi (hereinafter referred to as NCTD) either under Article 239AA[3][b] or
under Article 239AA[7] of the Constitution of India, the Hon'ble Supreme Court was required
to consider a reference concerning the subject of services in NCTD.
AND WHEREAS, in absence of any specific Parliamentary legislation dealing with
the subject of services as contained in Entry 41 of List II of the Seventh Schedule specifically
and in detail, the Hon'ble Supreme Court was pleased to pass a judgment dated 11.05.2023
in C.A. No. 2357/2017 in the matter of Govt. of NCT of Delhi Versus Union of India.
AND WHEREAS, in view of its special status as a national capital, a scheme of
administration has to be formulated by Parliamentary law, to balance both local and national
democratic interests which are at stake, which would reflect the aspirations of the people
through joint and collective responsibility of both the Government of India and the
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (hereinafter referred to as GNCTD).
AND WHEREAS, with a view to give effect to the intent and purpose behind the
provisions of Article 239AA, a permanent authority headed by the democratically elected
Chief Minister of Delhi along with Chief Secretary, GNCTD the head of the administration
representing the will of the officers of GNCTD and the Principal Secretary Home, GNCTD is
being introduced to make recommendations to the Lieutenant Governor regarding matters
concerning transfer posting, vigilance and other incidental matters. This would statutorily
balance the interest of the nation with the interest of Union Territory of Delhi in administration
of the capital by giving purposeful meaning to the manifestation of democratic will of
people reposed both in the Central Government as well as the GNCTD.
SEC. 1]
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
3
AND WHEREAS with a view to give effect to the very intent and purpose behind the
provisions of Article 239AA and retaining the active, meaningful and effective participation
of the President of India in national interest, which is also a democratic will of the nation in
the matter of governance of its capital in the question of posting, transfer and other allied
matters relating to the officers/employees employed in the functioning of the GNCTD and
while providing for the democratic governance of the Council of Ministers of the GNCTD,
provisions are required to be made.
AND WHEREAS for the purpose giving effect to Article 239(1) read with Article
239AA and in exercise of powers of Article 239(1), Article 239AA[3][b] and Article 239AA[7]
of the Constitution of India, which includes the power to supplementing the provisions
under Article 239AA including the power to make suitable amendments thereof, an Ordinance
namely the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (Amendment) Ordinance,
2023 is proposed to provide for a comprehensive scheme of administration of services
deployed in the functioning of NCTD and other allied issues thereby balancing the local
and domestic interests of the people staying in the NCTD with the democratic will of the
entire nation reflected through the President of India.
AND, WHEREAS Parliament is not in session and the President is satisfied that
circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action.
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of article 123 of
the Constitution, the President is pleased to promulgate the following Ordinance:—
1. (1) This Ordinance may be called the Government of National Capital Territory of
Delhi (Amendment) Ordinance, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. In the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in section 2,after clause (e), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
'(ea) "Lieutenant Governor" means the administrator appointed under article
239 of the Constitution for the National Capital Territory of Delhi and designated as
Lieutenant Governor by the President;
(eb) "Minister" means a member of the Council of Ministers referred to in
clause (4) of article 239AA of the Constitution, by whatever name called and includes
a Deputy Minister;'.
3. After section 3, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"3A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgement, order or decree of
any Court,the Legislative Assembly shall have the power to make laws as per Article
239AA except with respect to any matter enumerated in Entry 41 of List II of the
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India or any matter connected therewith or
incidental thereto.".
4. In section 41 of the principal Act,—
(A) in the marginal heading for the words "act in his discretion", the words "act
in his sole discretion" shall be substituted;
(B) in sub-section (1),—
(a) in the opening paragraph, for the words "act in his discretion", the
words "act in his sole discretion" shall be substituted;
(b) in clause (ii), the word "; or" shall be inserted at the end;
(c) after clause (ii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(iii) in discharge of his functions under Part IV-A of this Act.".
Short title
and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
1 of 1992.
Insertion of
new section 3A.
Additional
provisions
with regard to
Legislative
Assembly.
Amendment
of section 41.
4
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[PART II—
(C) in sub-section (2), for the words "not a matter as respects", the words "not
a matter in respect of" shall be substituted;
5. After Part IV, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:—
'PART IV-A
PROVISIONS  RELATING  TO  THE  MAINTENANCE  OF  THE  DEMOCRATIC
AND  ADMINISTRATIVE  BALANCE  IN  THE  GOVERNANCE  OF  NATIONAL
CAPITAL  TERRITORY  OF  DELHI
45A. In this part, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) "All India Services" means any service created under the All India
Services Act, 1951, except the Indian Police Service;
(b) "Authority" means the National Capital Civil Service Authority
constituted under sub-section (1) of section 45E;
(c) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Authority appointed
under sub-section (2) of section 45D;
(d) "Chief Secretary" means the Chief Secretary of the Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi appointed by the Central Government;
(e) "Council" means the Council of Ministers referred to in clause (4) of
article 239AA of the Constitution;
(f) "DANICS" means the Delhi, Andaman and Nicobar, Lakshadweep,
Daman and Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli (Civil) Services;
(g) "Delhi Subordinate Services Selection Board" means the Delhi
Subordinate Services Selection Board constituted by the Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi through its Resolution No. F-3(7)/93-S. III,
dated 4th October, 1996 read with Resolution F. 3(24)/DSSSB/2008-S.III/1764,
dated 12th May, 2008;
(h) "Department" means a Department or office specified in the Schedule
to the Business of Delhi (Allocation) Rules, 1993;
(i) "Group 'A' officers" means the officers serving in the affairs of
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi—
(a) belonging to All India Services, except the officers of the Indian
Police Service;
(b) who are classified as Group 'A' officers, under rule 4 of the
Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965,
but shall not include the officers who are serving in connection with any subject matter,
whether fully or in part connected with Entries 1, 2 and 18 of List II of the Seventh Schedule
to the Constitution, and Entries 64, 65 and 66 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution,insofar as they relate to the Entries 1, 2 and 18, or any other subject matter
which is connected therewith or incidental thereto;
(j) "Group 'B' officials" means the Group 'B' officials, as classified under
rule 4 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules,
1965, but shall not include the officials who are serving in connection with any
subject matter, whether fully or in part connected with Entries 1, 2 and 18 of
 List II--State List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, and Entries 64,
65 and 66 of List II--State List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution in so
far as they relate to the Entries 1, 2 and 18, or any other subject matter which is
connected therewith or incidental thereto;
(k) "Group 'C' officials" means Group 'C' officials as such classified under
rule 4 of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules,
1965, but shall not include the officials who are serving in connection with any
Insertion of
new Part IV-A.
Definitions.
61 of 1951.
SEC. 1]
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
5
subject matter, whether fully or in part connected with Entries 1, 2 and 18 of
 List II--State List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, and Entries 64,
65 and 66 of List II--State List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution
insofar as they relate to the Entries 1, 2 and 18, or any other subject matter
which is connected therewith or incidental thereto;
(l) "National Capital Territory of Delhi" means the Union Territory of
Delhi as defined in clause (1) of article 239AA of the Constitution;
(m) "Member" means a member of the Authority and includes the
Chairperson;
 (n) "Principal Home Secretary" means the Principal Home Secretary of
the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi appointed by the Central
Government;
(o) "Secretary" means a Secretary of the Department to the Government
of National Capital Territory of Delhi.
45B. (1) The following shall be the Public Service Commissions for National
Capital Territory of Delhi, namely:—
(i) the Union Public Service Commission for appointment to the posts in
Group 'A' and Group 'B' gazetted posts; and
(ii) The Delhi Subordinate Services Selection Board for appointment to
the Group 'B' non-gazetted and Group 'C' non-gazetted posts.
45C. The Central Government may make rules to provide for any one or more of
the following matters, in connection with the affairs of the Government of National
Capital Territory of Delhi under this Part, namely:—
(a) the tenure of office, salaries and allowances, provident funds,
pensions, gratuities, leave of absence and other conditions of service of officers
and other employees appointed or posted;
(b) the powers, duties and functions of officers and other employees
appointed or posted;
(c) the qualifications of candidates for appointment to the posts and the
manner of selection for the appointments;
(d) transfer or posting of the officers and other employees posted;
(e) the procedure to be followed in imposing any penalty, suspension
pending departmental inquiries before the imposition of such penalty and the
authority by whom such suspension or penalty may be ordered; and the officer
or authority to whom an appeal or revision shall lie;
(f) any other matter which is incidental to or necessary for the purpose of
regulating the appointment and conditions of service of persons appointed to
services and posts; and
(g) any other matter for which, in the opinion of the Central Government,
provisions to be made by rules.
45D. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, any authority, board, commission or any statutory body, by whatever name
it may be called, or any office bearer or member thereof, constituted or appointed by
or under any law for the time being in force, in and for the National Capital Territory of
Delhi, shall be constituted or appointed or nominated by the President.
45E. (1) There shall be an Authority to be known as the National Capital Civil
Service Authority to exercise the powers conferred on, and discharge the functions
assigned to it under this Part.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules
under this
Part.
Public Service
Commissions
for National
Capital
Territory of
Delhi.
Constitution of
authorities,
boards,
commissions or
statutory
bodies.
Constitution of
National
Capital Civil
Service
Authority.
6
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[PART II—
(2) The Authority, referred to in sub-section (1), shall consist of the following
Members, namely:—
(a) the Chief Minister of Government of National Capital Territory of
Delhi, who shall be the Chairperson of the Authority, ex officio;
(b) the Chief Secretary of Government of National Capital Territory of
Delhi, Member, ex officio.
(c) the Principal Home Secretary, Government of  National Capital Territory
of Delhi, who shall be the Member Secretary to the Authority, ex officio.
(3) All matters required to be decided by the Authority shall be decided by
majority of votes of the members present and voting.
(4) All recommendations of the Authority shall be authenticated by the Member
Secretary.
(5) The head office of the Authority shall be at Delhi.
45F. (1) The National Capital Civil Service Authority shall meet at such time
and place as the Member Secretary may decide with approval of the Chairperson of
the Authority, as and when so required.
(2) The Chairperson of the Authority shall preside over the meetings of the
Authority.
(3) The quorum for the meeting of the Authority shall be of two members.
45G. (1) The Central Government, in consultation with the Authority, shall
determine the nature and the categories of officers and other employees required to
assist the Authority in the discharge of its functions and provide the Authority with
such officers and employees, as it may deem fit.
(2) The officers and other employees of the Authority shall discharge their
duties and functions under the general superintendence and control of the Authority.
(3) The salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other
employees appointed under sub-section (1) shall be by rules made by the Central
Government.
45H. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in
force, the National Capital Civil Service Authority shall have the responsibility to
recommend the transfers and postings of all the Group 'A' officers and officers of
DANICS serving in the affairs of the Government of National Capital Territory of
Delhi but not officers serving in connection with any subject matter, either fully or in
part, connected with Entries 1, 2, and 18 of List II- State List of the Seventh Schedule
to the Constitution, and Entries 64, 65 and 66 of List II- State List of the Seventh
Schedule to the Constitution in so far as they relate to the entries 1, 2, and 18, or any
other subject matter which is connected therewith or incidental thereto, to the
Lieutenant Governor:
Provided that Authoritymay, if it deems appropriate, by way of a recommendation,
delegate the responsibility to any other authority or department of the Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi.
(2) The National Capital Civil Service Authority shall have the responsibility to
recommend for all matters connected with and falling under the subject of vigilance
and non-vigilance matters for the purpose of disciplinary proceedings and prosecution
sanctions against all the Group 'A' officers, including the officers of the All India
Services and DANICS, serving in the affairs of the Government of National Capital
Territory of Delhi but not officers serving in connection with any subject matter,
Meetings of
National
Capital Civil
Service
Authority.
Appointment
of officers
and other
staff of
National
Capital Civil
Service
Authority.
Powers and
functions of
National
Capital Civil
Service
Authority.
SEC. 1]
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
7
either fully or in part, connected with Entries 1, 2, and 18 of List II-State List of the
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, and Entries 64, 65 and 66 of List II-State List of
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution in so far as they relate to the entries 1, 2,
and 18, or any other subject matter which is connected therewith or incidental thereto,
to the Lieutenant Governor:
Provided that the Authority may, if it deems appropriate, by way of a
recommendation, delegate the responsibility in respect to such officers serving in the
affairs of the Government of  National Capital Territory of Delhi to an officer of All
India Services.
(3) The Lieutenant Governor, after the receipt of such recommendation under
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of this section, may pass appropriate orders giving
effect to the recommendation made:
Provided that the Lieutenant Governor, before passing appropriate orders on
such recommendation, may ask for any relevant material regarding the Group 'A'
officers, including the officers of the All India Services and DANICS, serving in the
affairs of the Government of  National Capital Territory of Delhi:
Provided further that in case the Lieutenant Governor differs with the
recommendation made, whether based upon the material so called for or otherwise,
the Lieutenant Governor may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, return the
recommendation to the Authority for reconsideration by the Authority:
Provided also that in case of difference of opinion, the decision of the Lieutenant
Governor shall be final.
(4) Without prejudice to generality of the provisions contained in
sub-section (1), the National Capital Civil Service Authority shall—
(a) make recommendations for—
(i) stability of tenure of posting of officers and other employees;
(ii) rotational transfers and postings from sensitive to non-sensitive
posts and vice-versa;
(iii) determining suitability of officer for posting as Head of the
Department;
(iv) transfers and postings of all officers and other employees serving
in the affairs of the Government of  National Capital Territory of  Delhi;
(b) make policy insofaras it relates to—
(i) the capacity building of the officers and other employees serving
in the affairs of the Government of  National Capital Territory of  Delhi;
(ii) ensuring effectiveness in public services delivery in the
Government of National Capital Territory of  Delhi;
(iii) ensuring good governance and e-governance in public
administration in the Government of  National Capital Territory of  Delhi;
(iv) ensuring greater transparency in the administration of the
Government of  National Capital Territory of  Delhi;
(v) ensuring the presence of a citizen centric administration in the
Government of  National Capital Territory of  Delhi; and
(vi) any other matter connected therewith or incidental thereto.
45-I. (1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government and the
Government of the National Capital Territory of  Delhi an annual report containing
such details of the steps taken, proposals made and other measures undertaken by it
in pursuance of its functions, in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
Annual report.
8
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[PART II—
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report furnished under
sub-section (1) to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive sessions.
(3) The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi shall cause the annual
report furnished under sub-section (1) to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received,
before the Legislative Assembly of National Capital Territory of Delhi within a total
period of thirty days while it is in session, or in its forthcoming session.
45J. (1) The Minister in-charge may, by means of standing orders, give such
directions as deems thinks fit for the disposal of proposals or matters in his Department:
Provided that no such standing order shall be issued in contravention of the
provisions of the Constitution or any other law for the time being in force including
the provisions of this Act or Rules made thereunder or the statutory powers conferred
under any law upon the officials, and financial powers delegated under the Delegation
of the Financial Powers Rules, 1978.
(2) The Minister, in consultation with the Secretary concerned, may issue
standing orders, concerning the matters or classes of matters which are to be brought
to the personal notice of the Minister:
Provided that no such standing order shall be issued in contravention of the
provisions of the Constitution or any other law for the time being in force including
the provisions of this Act or Rules made thereunder or the statutory powers conferred
under any law upon the officials, and financial powers delegated under the Delegation
of the Financial Powers Rules, 1978.
(3) The copies of directions and standing orders shall be forwarded to the
Lieutenant Governor and the Chief Minister.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), in addition
to the proposals or matters required to be placed before the Lieutenant Governor
under any law for the time being in force, the following proposals or matters shall be
submitted to the Lieutenant Governor and the Chief Minister through the Chief
Secretary for their opinion, before issuing any orders thereon, namely:—
(i) matters which affect or are likely to affect the peace and tranquility of
the National Capital Territory of Delhi;
(ii) matters which affect or are likely to affect the interest of any particular
community, the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the socially and
educationally backward classes or any other class of persons;
(iii) matters which affect the relations of the Government of National
Capital Territory of Delhi with the Central Government, or any State Government,
the Supreme Court of India or the High Court of Delhi and such other authorities
as may be determined;
(iv) proposals or matters required to be referred to the Central Government
under this Act;
(v) matters pertaining to the Secretariat of the Lieutenant Governor and
personnel establishment and other matters relating to his office;
(vi) matters on which Lieutenant Governor is required to make an order
under any law or instrument in force in his sole discretion;
(vii) matters specified under general or special order issued by the
Lieutenant Governor under proviso to sub-section (2) of section 44;
Disposal of
matters by
Minister.
SEC. 1]
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
9
(viii) petitions for mercy from persons under sentence for death and
other important cases in which it is proposed to recommend any revision of a
judicial sentence;
(ix) matters relating to summoning, prorogation and dissolution of the
Legislative Assembly, removal of disqualification of voters at elections to the
Legislative Assembly, Local Self Government Institutions and other matters
connected therewith; and
(x) any other matter of administrative importance which the President of
India or the Chief Minister may consider necessary.
45K. (1) The Secretary of the Department concerned shall be responsible for
preparing and authenticating every memorandum including the Cabinet Notes, for
consideration of the Council of Ministers and for obtaining approval of the Minister
in-charge and the Chief Minister.
(2) In case of proposals involving more than one Department, the views of all
concerned Secretaries and the Ministers of all Departments consulted on the proposal
shall be clearly and separately reflected in writing and signed by the Minister and the
Secretary in the memorandum so as to ensure that in case of disagreement, the Council
of Ministers shall take a decision.
(3) In case the Secretary to the Council of Ministers is of the opinion that the
proposal considered and decided by the Council of Ministers is not in accordance
with the provisions of the law for the time being in force or any rules of procedure
made under section 44, it shall be the duty of the Secretary to the Council of Ministers
to bring it to the notice of Lieutenant Governor for taking a decision thereon.
(4) Any matter which is likely to bring the Government of the National Capital
Territory of Delhi into controversy with the Central Government or with any State
Government, the Supreme Court of India or the High Court of Delhi and such other
authorities as may be prescribed, the Secretary to the Department concerned shall, as
soon as possible, bring it to the notice of the Lieutenant Governor, Chief Minister and
the Chief Secretary in writing.
(5) The Chief Secretary and the Secretary to the Department concerned shall
be responsible for compliance with the provisions of this Act and the rules framed
under section 44, and when either of them considers that there has been any material
departure from the same, instead of giving effect to such departure, he or they shall
personally bring it to the notice of the Minister-in-charge, Chief Minister and the
Lieutenant Governor immediately in writing.
45L. (1) The Central Government may, by notification published in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Part.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Ordinance shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in
session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rules or both Houses agree that the rules should not
be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
45M. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Part, the
President may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Part as may appear to him to be necessary or
expedient for the purposes of removing the difficulty:
Duties of
Secretaries.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament.’.
DROUPADI MURMU,
President.
————
DR. REETA VASISHTA,
 Secretary to the Govt. of  India.
MGIPMRND—38GI(S3)—19-05-2023.
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD,  NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF  PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
10
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
[PART II— SEC. 1]
Kshitiz 
Mohan
Digitally signed by 
Kshitiz Mohan 
Date: 2023.05.19 
21:55:08 +05'30'
