Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And
Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
2025 INSC 616                                                                   REPORTAB
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5823 OF 2025
                            (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 21286 of 2024
             ASF BUILDTECH PRIVATE LIMITED                                   ...APPELLAN
                                                     VERSUS
             SHAPOORJI PALLONJI AND COMPANY
             PRIVATE LIMITED                                               ...RESPONDENT
                                                 JUDGMENT
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.:
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided in the following parts: -
INDEX A. FACTUAL MATRIX.................................................................................... 3
B. SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES ........................................................... 7 i.
Submissions on behalf of the Appellant ................................................... 7 ii.
Submissions on behalf of the Respondent No. 1.................................... 12 C.
ANALYSIS .................................................................................................. 15 i. Whether
the Arbitral Tribunal has the power to Implead / Join Non-
Signatories to the Arbitration Agreement? .......................................... 15 a.
Contradictory Views of different High Courts on the subject ............. 16 I. Decisions
holding that the Arbitral Tribunal does not have the power to Implead a
non-signatory to the Arbitration Agreement .............. 16 II. Decisions holding that the
Arbitral Tribunal has the power to Implead a non-signatory to the Arbitration
Agreement .................. 41 b. Evolution of the law on referral or joinder of
Non-Signatories to arbitration proceedings and the Aversion to the power of Arbitral
Tribunals to implead a Non-Signatory ................................................ 62 I. Decision of
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
1
Chloro Controls and the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015
................................................................. 62 II. Decision of Cox and Kings (I) and the
Judicial Rectification of the first misconception by Chloro Controls.
......................................... 77 III. Decision of Krish Spinning and the Judicial
Rectification of the second misconception emanating from SBP & Co.........................
89 c. How Cox and Kings (I) contemplates determination of mutual intention of
Non-Signatories to arbitration agreements..................... 108 I. The nature and extent
of the test laid down in Cox and Kings (I) for determining Non-Signatories who are
b o u n d  b y  t h e  a r b i t r a t i o n  a g r e e m e n t s .
................................................................................... 110 II. Determining the
“existence” viz-à-viz the intention of parties from “express words” of an Arbitration
Agreement.............................. 116 III. Decision of Cox and Kings (II) and Ajay
Madhusudan and the scope of Section 11 of the Act, 1996 for joinder of
non-signatories to arbitration proceedings. ................................................................
131 ii. Arbitral Tribunal has the authority and power to implead Non-
Signatories to the arbitration agreement on its own accord. ............. 141 a. No
inhibition in the scheme of Act, 1996 which precludes the Arbitral Tribunal from
impleading a Non-Signatory on its own accord ............. 141 b. Doctrine of
Kompetenz-Kompetenz and the Jurisdictional Reach of an Arbitral Tribunal
................................................................................ 156 c. Requirement of Notice of
I n v o c a t i o n  u n d e r  S e c t i o n  2 1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1 6 3  D .
CONCLUSION.......................................................................................... 188
1. Leave Granted.
2. This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the High court of Delhi
dated 4th July, 2024 in Arb. A. (Comm.) No. 4/2024 & I.As. 2124/2024-
25/2024, Arb. A. (Comm.) No. 5/2024 & I.A. 2197/2024 and O.M.P. (T)(Comm.) 4/2024 by which
the High Court dismissed the appeals filed by the appellant herein under Section 37 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short, the “Act, 1996”) and thereby affirmed the order
passed by the Arbitral Tribunal rejecting the challenge made by the appellant herein to its
jurisdiction on the ground that the appellant being a non-signatory to the arbitration agreement
could not have been impleaded in the array of parties and join the arbitration proceedings.
3. It appears that the High Court decided two appeals filed under Section 37(2) of the 1996 Act. The
present appeal arises from the order passed by the High Court in Arb. A. (Comm.) No. 4 of 2024.
A. FACTUAL MATRIX
4. The Respondent No. 1, Shapoorji Pallonji & Co. Pvt. Ltd. (“SPCPL”) is the Respondent
No.1/counter claimant before the Arbitrator. The Respondent No. 3 (Black Canyon SEZ Pvt. Ltd. or
“BCSPL”) initiated arbitration against SPCPL in relation to Settlement Agreement dated
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
2
24.07.2020.
5. SPCPL filed its Counter-Claim against BCSPL as well as the appellant herein (ASF Buildtech Pvt.
Ltd or “ABPL”) and Respondent No.2 (ASF Insignia SEZ Pvt. Ltd or “AISPL”), which constituted
and formed part of the ‘ASF Group’. SPCPL has pleaded before the Arbitrator that BCSPL, ASIPL
and ABPL being a part of the ASF Group are bound by the Arbitration Agreement contained in the
Works Contract dated 21.11.2016 on the basis of the Group of Companies Doctrine.
6. BCSPL, ABPL, and AISPL respectively filed separate Section 16 Applications before the Arbitrator
seeking rejection of SPCPL’s counter claim to the extent it is against AISPL and ABPL. By the
Arbitrator’s Orders dated 23.05.2023 and 17.10.2023 respectively (“Tribunal’s First Order”and
‘Tribunal’s Second Order’ respectively), the Arbitrator dismissed the said Applications, inter alia
holding that, in order to decide whether or not the inclusion of AISPL and ABPL amongst the
party-Respondents on basis of such doctrine is correct on basis of facts narrated by SPCPL, some
crucial aspects as regards the role and conduct of AISPL and ABPL, would need adjudication as
questions mixed of facts and law, which cannot be holistically determined without first arraying
them as parties.
7. In such circumstances referred to above, the matter was taken to the High Court. The High Court,
after an exhaustive consideration of all the relevant aspects of the matter, disposed of the appeal in
the following terms: -
“96. In the present case, a perusal of the impugned orders shows that the Ld. Sole
Arbitrator has conflated the issue of the applicability of the Group of Companies
doctrine & alter ego doctrine, and thus has resorted to piercing the corporate veil. All
three could not have been combined in the manner in which the Ld. Sole Arbitrator
has done. However, there are certain facts which are relevant:
i) That the ASF Group is one cohesive group in which AISPL, ABPL and BCSPL are
part of the group. There is no distinct management dealing with the activities of these
three companies. The correspondence on record shows that whether in respect of
demobilization or other performances under the contracts, AISPL is backing BCSPL,
ASF Group is also standing as guarantee for BCSPL. The Comfort Letter given by
ASPL is evidence of this. Thus, in effect, though there are three distinct incorporated
legal entities, the group is functioning as one unit. The initial work order was with
AISPL. Claims raised relate to periods even prior to the Novation Agreement where
AISPL would be a necessary and a relevant party.
ii) Non-payment of dues is also another claim of SPCPL qua which AISPL gave a
Comfort Letter.
iii) ABPL is the holding company and is part of the ASF Group.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
3
The order dated 22nd July, 2022 uses the expression ASF which includes ABPL as its part of ASF.
Thus, the Ld. Sole Arbitrator ought to have simply applied GoCD as enshrined in the Cox and Kings
(supra) to entertain the claims filed by the SPCPL.
97. In the overall scheme of things, therefore, the delineation of Case No.1 and Case No.2 was wholly
unnecessary. The impleadment of AISPL and ABPL is in accordance with law, though the Ld. Sole
Arbitrator used different reasons for dismissing the Section 16 applications. In effect, the Ld. Sole
Arbitrator has held that claims can be maintained against AISPL and ABPL. In these facts and
circumstances, the Court disposes of the three petitions in the following terms:
i) AISPL and ABPL are impleaded as Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 in the arbitral
proceedings.
ii) The SoC filed by SPCL is treated as counterclaim against BCSPL, AISPL and ABPL.
iii) The delineation of Case No. 1 and Case No.2 was wholly unnecessary and is set aside.
iv) For all practical purposes, the case pending before the Ld. Sole Arbitrator shall be treated as one
case arising out of reference order dated 22nd July, 2022.
v) There is no legal incapacity in the Ld. Sole Arbitrator to deal with the claims and counterclaims
and the mandate of the Ld. Arbitrator does not deserves to be terminated.
vi) The Ld. Sole Arbitrator was correct in his observation that, for reasons of financial and strategic
convenience, BCSPL’s attempt was to restrict the counterclaim only to BCSPL and not to AISPL &
ABPL. Considering that AISPL and the ASF Group had assumed responsibility for payments to be
made to SPCPL and for the implementation of the project, as evidenced by the Comfort Letter and
various emails exchanged, their impleadment was necessary for a comprehensive adjudication of the
matter.
vii) In view of the fact that SPCPL has no objection to its claim petition being treated as a
counterclaim to the BCSPL’s claim, it is ordered that both cases shall be treated as a single reference
and a single dispute. The claims of BCSPL and the counterclaim of SPCPL shall be adjudicated by
the Ld. Sole Arbitrator after framing issues. No bifurcation would be permissible.
viii) Evidence shall be led first by BCSPL, AISPL and ABPL and thereafter SPCPL in their respective
claims and counterclaims.
98. Let the present order be communicated to the Ld. Sole Arbitrator by the Registry. The above two
appeals and the Section 14 petition are disposed of in the above terms. All pending applications are
disposed of.”
8. In such circumstances referred to above, the appellant is here before this Court with the present
appeal.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
4
B.      SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES
i.      Submissions on behalf of the Appellant
9. In the written submissions filed on behalf of the appellant herein, it is submitted as under: -
“A. Introductory Submissions:
2. At the outset, it is respectfully submitted that there is not even a shred of material
to show any involvement whatsoever, much less prima facie, regarding the
involvement of ABPL in the negotiation, performance or termination of the subject
agreements which are the subject matter of the arbitral proceedings.
Accordingly, the tests laid down by this Hon’ble Court in Para 71 of Ajay Madhusudan Patel & Ors. v.
Jyotrindra S. Patel & Ors., 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2597, for making ABPL a ‘veritable party’ is not at
all fulfilled. As a matter of fact, the Arbitral Tribunal and the High Court have sought to rope in
ABPL on three counts, namely:
(i) that ABPL is the holding company of Black Canyon SEZ Private Limited (“BCSPL”
/ “Respondent No. 2”) and ASF Insignia SEZ Pvt. Ltd. (“AISPL” / “Respondent No.
3”);
(ii) there is common management between ABPL and BCSPL (Impugned Judgment
at Pg. 47-48 of the Petition, and
(iii) the branding / logo used by BCSPL is the common logo of ‘ASF Group’
(Impugned Judgment at Pg. 67-68 of the Petition.
3. It is submitted that none of the aforesaid three aspects relied upon the Arbitral Tribunal and the
High Court can be the ground for arraying a non-signatory as a ‘veritable party’. If such contention
is accepted, every holding company will have to be necessarily arrayed as a ‘veritable party’ which is
completely against the dictum of Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd v. Discovery Enterprises Pvt.
Ltd., (2022) 8 SCC 42; Cox and Kings Ltd. v. SAP India Pvt. Ltd. & Anr., 2023 SCC Online SC 1634
and Ajay Madhusudan Patel (supra).
B. Essential Questions of Law
4. The important questions of law falling for kind consideration of this Hon’ble Court in the present
Special Leave Petition are:
a. Whether the Petitioner, who is not a signatory to the arbitration agreement, could
be joined as a party Respondent by the Counter Claimant (“SPCPL”/ “Respondent
No. 1”) in its ‘Separate Statement of Claim’, without the referral court under section
11 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (“Act”) directing as such, and without
any leave of the Ld. Arbitral Tribunal being sought in this regard?
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
5
b. If so, could the same be done by directly issuing notice for filing of statement of
defense to the Counter Claim (wrongly styled as ‘Separate Statement of Claim’)
without a prior opportunity being granted to the Petitioner to contest such joinder as
a party Respondent?
c. Whether such joinder as a party Respondent could be carried out in contravention
of the principles laid down in Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (supra); Cox and
Kings (supra) and Ajay Madhusudan Patel (supra) as regards the parameters for
invocation of group of companies doctrine?
d. Whether merely because the Petitioner is stated to be the holding company for
BCSPL and AISPL; all group companies have the same domain name/website and the
email signature states ‘ASF Group’, the same would suffice to satisfy the tests for
invocation of the group of companies doctrine for joinder of the Petitioner to the
array of respondents?
C. ABPL not a party to the dispute
5. ABPL was not a party or had any involvement in the following:
(i) Negotiations for executing Work Contract dated 21 November 2016; (ii) Works
Contract dated 21 November 2016; (iii) Supplementary Works Contract dated 9
February 2018; (iv) Novation Agreement on 17 April 2018; (v) Letter of Comfort
dated 17 April 2018; (vi) Addendum No. 1 dated 27 February 2019 to the Works
Contract; (vii) Settlement Agreement dated 24 July 2020; (viii) Notice invoking
arbitration dated 24 January 2022;
(ix) Reply to Notice invoking arbitration dated 4 March 2022, where SPCPL itself did not make
ABPL a party in this reply; (x) Section 11 proceedings before the High Court of Delhi; and (xi)
BCSPL’s statement of claim dated 31 October 2022. A table on stages of disputes and involvement of
parties therein is annexed herewith as Schedule A. The same leads to an inescapable conclusion that
the involvement of the Petitioner herein in the negotiation or performance of the contract was
neither positive, nor direct and substantial, in fact it was not even incidental.
6. It is for the first time that ABPL was made a party to the proceedings by direct joinder as a
respondent to the SPCPL’s counter claim or ‘statement of claim’ dated 14 February 2023, without
obtaining any leave from the Arbitral Tribunal in this regard and merely on account of being a
holding company of BCSPL.
D. No material whatsoever to show ABPL’s direct involvement
7. There is not even a single correspondence or transactional document to show the involvement of
ABPL qua the negotiation towards, execution of or discussions towards Works Contract, the
Novation Agreement, the Letter of Comfort and the Settlement Agreement in question.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
6
8. Even SPCPL, in the Reply, had only limited its contention for inclusion of a non-signatory to
AISPL and not to ABPL.
9. Further, even the order of the High Court of Delhi in the Section 11 Application under the Act
records that SPCPL had only insisted on making AISPL as a party and there is not even a whisper
about ABPL. Further, the reference to ASF in the said order is clearly a reference to AISPL who was
the original contracting party and not to ASG Group.
10. As per the law laid down by this Hon’ble Court in Ajay Madhusudan Patel & Ors. v. Jyotrindra S.
Patel & Ors., 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2597 (Para 71), this Hon’ble Court has held that:
“71. It is evident that the intention of the parties to be bound by an arbitration
agreement can be gauged from the circumstances that surround the participation of
the non-signatory party in the negotiation, performance, and termination of the
underlying contract containing such an agreement. Further, when the conduct of the
non-signatory is in harmony with the conduct of the others, it might lead the other
party or parties to legitimately believe that the non-signatory was a veritable party to
the contract containing the arbitration agreement. However, in order to infer consent
of the non-signatory party, their involvement in the negotiation or performance of
the contract must be positive, direct and substantial and not be merely incidental.
Thus, the conduct of the non-signatory party along with the other attending
circumstances may lead the referral court to draw a legitimate inference that it is a
veritable party to the arbitration agreement.” (emphasis supplied)
11. It is most humbly submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the present case, which have
been altogether ignored by the Ld. Arbitral Tribunal and the High Court, there is neither any finding
nor any material to support the inference that that the involvement of the Petitioner herein in the
negotiation or performance of the contract was either positive, direct and substantial, in fact, it was
not even incidental.
12. It is prima facie evident that ABPL is not a party to the Agreements and a mini trial is not
required to determine the same. Additionally, the arbitral tribunal while directly issuing a notice to
ABPL for filing of statement of defence to the ‘statement of claim’ filed by SPCPL had not gone into
such questions in depth, thus indicating that no evidence was taken into consideration to implead
ABPL without the leave of the arbitral tribunal in this regard; and by way of a procedure unknown to
arbitration law inasmuch as a separate statement of claim was entertained by the arbitral tribunal,
contrary to established procedure that there can only be a counter claim by respondent, i.e., SPCPL.
E. Patent errors in the Impugned Judgment
13. The analysis by the High Court in the Impugned Judgment begins at Page 43 of the Petition
wherein the High Court notices the: (a) Works Contract; (b) Novation Agreement; (c) Settlement
agreement; (d) Letter of Comfort. Notably, in any of the aforesaid paragraphs, ABPL is neither
involved nor mentioned.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
7
14. In Para 66, the High Court notes that there is common management between ABPL and BCSPL,
and in Para 70, an email dated 9 December 2020 is noted to conclude that because one of the
personnel of BCSPL had used the same domain name, and there was a logo of ASF Group/ASF
Insignia, therefore, ABPL being part of the ASF group and the holding company of BCSPL and
AISPL was to be included as a party to the arbitration proceedings.
15. The five factors laid down by this Hon’ble Court in Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (supra), are
thereafter discussed in Para 91-94. It is relevant to note that none of the said paragraphs show any
direct involvement of ABPL, in so far as the transaction in question is concerned.
16. The only reason due to which ABPL has been allowed to be continued as a party to the
arbitration proceedings is because ABPL is a holding company of BCSPL, which is completely
contrary to the law laid down by this Hon’ble Court in Cox and Kings (supra) and Oil and Natural
Gas Corporation (supra).
17. Merely because a company is a holding company, it cannot, by itself, be a ground to implead the
holding company in an arbitration proceeding. To do so would result in disastrous consequences,
where the mere factum of the company being a holding company would expose the holding company
to litigations initiated against its subsidiary. This would completely militate against and obliterate
the fundamental principle of separate corporate personality.
18. It is submitted that none of the five ingredients laid down by this Hon’ble Court in Oil and
Natural Gas Corporation (supra) and affirmed, in Cox and Kings (supra) (Para 170) are prima facie
satisfied, in the facts of the present case.
19. Further, the High Court in Para 97(viii) of the Impugned Judgment has further patently erred in
exceeding the jurisdiction under Section 37 of the Act and suo motu directing that evidence shall be
inter alia led by ABPL prior to SPCPL in whose counter- claim ABPL has been arrayed as a party
Respondent. Pertinently, the said aspect was neither a submission nor in issue before the High
Court.”
10. In such circumstances referred to above, Mr. Devadatt Kamat, the learned senior counsel
appearing on behalf of the appellant herein submitted that there being merit in his appeal, the same
may be allowed and the impugned order passed by the High Court may be set aside.
ii. Submissions on behalf of the Respondent No. 1
11. In the written submissions filed on behalf of the respondent No. 1 herein, it is submitted as
under: -
“II. Questions of law involved
5. The present SLP broadly gives rise to three questions of law for the kind
consideration of the Hon’ble Court:
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
8
a. Whether the Arbitrator could have issued notice to parties (AISPL and ABPL)
arrayed in SPCPL’s Counter Claim? b. Whether AISPL and ABPL ought to be
removed from the array of parties at the threshold stage before the complete
pleadings or evidence are before the Arbitrator? c. Whether the Arbitrator’s Orders
rejecting ABPL’s Section 16 Applications without finally deciding the legal or factual
role and liability of ABPL ought to be interfered with before the final Arbitral Award
is rendered?
6. It is submitted that the three issues are not distinct and rather inter-linked
inasmuch as the underlying premise pertains to the Arbitrator’s power to adjudicate
on matters in respect of non-
signatories, both procedurally and substantively. It is SPCPL’s case that all three issues have already
been answered in SPCPL’s favour by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in in Cox and Kings Ltd. v. SAP
India Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. and Ajay Madhusudhan Patel & Ors. v. Jyotrindra S. Patel & Ors.
III. The present SLP is ABPL’s fourth bite at the cherry
7. SPCPL has succeeded on the issues presently agitated on three prior occasions–
a) First, in BCSPL’s Section 16 Application dated 03.03.2023 seeking removal of AISPL and ABPL
from the array of parties, which was rejected by the Tribunal’s First Order dated 23.05.2023 with
detailed reasoning.
b) Second, in AISPL and ABPL’s Section 16 Applications dated 03.07.2023 seeking their own
removal from the array of parties, which was rejected by the Tribunal’s Second Order dated
17.10.2023 with detailed reasoning;
c) Third, before the High Court, where BCSPL filed a Petition u/s 14 seeking removal of the
Arbitrator, while ABPL and AISPL preferred Appeals u/s 37, culminating in the common Impugned
Judgement dated 04.07.2024 (‘Impugned Judgement’) rejecting the said challenge with detailed
reasoning.
Only ABPL remains aggrieved and has sought to challenge the Impugned Judgement by way of the
present SLP.
13. ABPL has sought to mis-categorize SPCPL’s case against ABPL as merely being against the
holding company of AISPL and BCSPL. However, this is ex-facie misconceived and contrary to the
record, inasmuch as SPCPL has specifically pleaded that the entire negotiation, performance and
termination of the Works Contract dated 21.11.2024 was with the ASF Group, though in the name of
its SPV, AISPL to develop the SEZ. It was represented and assured to SPCPL throughout that AISPL
had the entire support, backing and strength of the ASF Group of Companies.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
9
14. This representation and assurance to SPCPL was backed by, rather than being premised (as
sought to be alleged by ABPL), the fact that the BCSPL, AISPL and ABPL represented themselves to
the world at large as the ‘ASF Group’, functioning with the same staff & officials, using common
website 13 (www.asfinfrastructure.com) and domain email IDs (@asfinfrastructure.com). ABPL, as
also AISPL and BCSPL, is part of the ASF Group. Even behind the scenes, ABPL is the holding
company of BCSPL and AISPL, with 81.01% and 100% shareholding, respectively. All the three ASF
Group companies have common directors and also share a common registered address. It is
SPCPL’s case that the commonality of resources of the ASF Group (i.e., the promoters, the directors,
the shareholding, the officials, the financial and commercial backing, technical and IT systems etc)
is not a coincidence or a by-product and rather is by design.
15. At all times, in the ASF Group’s dealing with SPCPL, BCSPL/AISPL/ABPL were acting as single
economic unit and were together directly, substantially and actively involved in the negotiation and
performance of the subject Works Contract and Settlement Agreement. It is further SPCPL’s case
that BCSPL/AISPL/ABPL and/or ASF Group are inextricably linked and the ASF Group as a whole
maintained operational control over the performance of the Works Contract and Settlement
Agreement between the parties.
16. There was no distinction between ABPL, AISPL and BCSPL insofar as the negotiation and
performance of the Subject Contracts was concerned. For instance, the Novation Agreement dated
17.04.2018 was executed on behalf of the Petitioner by one ASF official Sh. Vinod Kumar Bhartiya.
The same ASF official had earlier attended the pre-bid meeting held on 30.01.2016 in relation to the
Works Contract in the stated capacity of AVP (Commercial) of the ‘ASF Group’. Item 2.1 of the
Minutes states ‘ASF Project Team’ and bidders were introduced. The same ASF official had
thereafter also attended the Meeting held on 02.06.2016 for LOI Civil Works of Building B1 awarded
to SPCPL on behalf of ‘AISPL’.
17. Similarly, Minutes of Meeting dated 25.10.2016 i.e., after the Meeting held on 02.06.2016
recording Mr. Bhartiya to have attended on behalf of AISPL, reflects his attendance on behalf of the
‘ASF Group’. Agenda items 1 & 2 of the aforementioned Minutes of Meeting also show ‘ASF’ as
having agreed to the change requested by SPCPL.
18. The Comfort Letter issued to SPCPL dated 17.04.2018 (on the same day as the Novation
Agreement) acknowledges that ‘AISPL and BCSPL are the group companies of ASF group and both
companies are under the management & control of the same set of management/owners.’ and that
AISPL had ‘nominated/appointed its associate company Black Canyon SEZ Pvt. Ltd. (“BCSPL”) as a
Co-Developer with regard to Black Canyon Private Campus Land, Black Canyon Building and its
allied structure...”. Subsequently, in a clear admission of all liabilities being jointly and severally
shared between BCSPL, AISPL and ABPL, Sh. Anil Sharma, Vice President (Projects), ASF Group
vide his email dated 02.06.2021 conveyed the commitment of ‘ASF management’ to release
outstanding dues to SPCPL.
19. Even Clause 5 of the Settlement Agreement dated 24.07.2020 (‘the Settlement Agreement’)
expressly records that the cost of materials ‘taken over by ASF’ from SPCPL, as mutually
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
10
determined, would form part of the outstanding dues of SPCPL. Even the Statement of Accounts
annexed to the Settlement Agreement, on the basis of which monies were to be disbursed to SPCPL
records TDS value debited by ‘ASF’, not by BCSPL or AISPL.
20. In the Section 16 application filed by ABPL 21 , ABPL admitted that “ABPL is a part of the ASF
group of companies, and Respondents No.1 [BCSPL] and 2 [AISPL] are associate companies of
ABPL.”
12. In such circumstances referred to above, Ms. Aakanksha Kaul, the learned counsel prayed that
there being no merit in this appeal, the same may be dismissed.
C. ANALYSIS
13. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone through the
materials on record, the only question that falls for our consideration is whether an arbitral tribunal
has the authority or power to implead or join a non-signatory to the arbitration agreement as a party
to the arbitration proceedings?
i. Whether the Arbitral Tribunal has the power to Implead / Join Non-
Signatories to the Arbitration Agreement?
14. One of the principle contentions raised by the appellants herein for the purpose of assailing the
Impugned Judgment is that the petitioner company being a non-signatory to the arbitration
agreement was never made a party to the proceedings before the referral court under Section 11 of
the Act, 1996 by virtue of which the arbitral tribunal came to be constituted. No notice of invocation
was issued either to the appellant company herein. In such circumstances, it was submitted that the
appellant company; a non-signatory to the arbitration agreement could not have been joined as a
party after the referral stage i.e., after the constitution of the arbitral tribunal solely on the basis of
the averments made in the counter-claim / statement of claim of the respondent no. 1 herein. In
other words, it was contended that after the culmination of the referral stage in terms of Section 11
of the Act, 1996, the arbitral tribunal has no power whatsoever to implead or join a non-signatory to
the arbitration agreement and that such power vests only with the referral court that too prior to the
arbitral tribunal coming into existence. a. Contradictory Views of different High Courts on the
subject.
15. Before we proceed to answer the aforesaid contention canvassed on behalf of the appellant, it
would be appropriate to first refer to the decisions of various High Courts and the cleavage of
opinion that have been expressed as regards the scope and power of an arbitral tribunal to implead
or join a non-signatory to an arbitration agreement.
I. Decisions holding that the Arbitral Tribunal does not have the power to Implead a non-signatory
to the Arbitration Agreement.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
11
16. The question whether an arbitral tribunal can implead a non-signatory to an arbitration
agreement or not came to be examined for the first time by the Bombay High Court in Oil and
Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. v. Jindal Drilling and Industries Ltd. reported in (2015) SCC OnLine
Bom 1707, wherein the petitioners therein had entered into separate and independent contracts
with the respondents therein as-well as one ‘DEPL’; an off-shoot company of the respondents
therein. When the respondents therein demanded payment of its dues under its own contract, the
petitioners refused payment on the ground that DEPL previously owed them a certain sum of
money, and since it was an off-shoot of the respondents, the amount owed to the respondents had
been adjusted against DEPL’s liability. The dispute came to be referred to arbitration and award was
passed against the petitioners directing them to repay the outstanding dues to the respondents. The
award came to be challenged before the Bombay High Court, wherein it was contended by the
petitioners that the arbitral tribunal ought to have lifted the corporate veil to find out whether DEPL
formed part of the respondent companies or not. The Bombay High Court inter-alia held that an
arbitral tribunal does not have the power to lift the corporate veil and that only the courts have such
power. In such circumstances, it held that since DEPL was not a party to the arbitration proceedings
between the petitioner and the respondents, and the tribunal having no power to pierce the
corporate veil, the High Court upheld the award. The relevant observations read as under: -
“47. The petitioners had canvassed before the arbitral tribunal that the arbitral
tribunal shall lift the corporate veil to find out that the said DEPL and the
respondents herein were forming part of the said Jindal Group and were one and the
same entity and thus the respondents were liable for the liabilities of the said DEPL.
In my view, the arbitral tribunal has no power to lift the corporate veil. Only a Court
can lift the corporate veil of a company if the strongest case is made out. In my view,
the prayer of the petitioners for lifting the corporate veil of the said DEPL was itself
not maintainable in the arbitration proceedings. The said DEPL was not a party to
these proceedings. Be that as it may, a perusal of the arbitral award clearly indicates
that the arbitral tribunal has refused to lift the corporate veil after considering the
evidence produced by both the parties and has rendered finding of fact that no such
case was made out by the petitioners for lifting the corporate veil which are not
perverse and thus cannot be interfered with by this Court under Section 34 of the
Arbitration Act.” (Emphasis supplied)
17. In Balmer Lawrie & Co. Ltd. v. Saraswathi Chemicals Proprietors Saraswathi Leather reported in
(2017) SCC OnLine Del 7519, the Delhi High Court was inter-alia dealing with the question whether
an arbitral award can be enforced against non-parties to the arbitration. The awardee therein sought
amendment of the execution petition in order to implead the directors of the judgment-debtor on
the ground that they had siphoned off the assets and hence ought to be held responsible to satisfy
the arbitral award. In this context, the Delhi High Court observed that an arbitral award cannot be
enforced against non-parties to the arbitration. This in its opinion was because, an arbitral tribunal
draws its jurisdiction only from the arbitration agreement, and an arbitral tribunal cannot proceed
against persons who are not a party to such agreement, and as such any award rendered by it would
not be binding upon non-parties to the arbitration agreement. It further observed that although in
exceptional circumstances, non-signatories who are otherwise bound by the arbitration agreement
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
12
may be compelled to arbitrate and thereby be liable for any award passed therein, yet such a course
can only be adopted by the courts and an arbitral tribunal cannot lift the corporate veil and proceed
against non- parties, as arbitration is always consensual and confined to the arbitration agreement
and as such an arbitral tribunal cannot enlarger its jurisdiction to non-parties. The relevant
observations read as under: -
“13. In the first instance, it is doubtful whether this Court could enforce the arbitral
award against non parties to the arbitration agreement. It is trite law that an arbitral
tribunal draws its jurisdiction from the agreement between the parties and persons
who are not party to the arbitration agreement cannot be proceeded against by an
arbitral tribunal. Thus, an arbitral award made by an arbitral tribunal against any
person who is not a party to the arbitration agreement would be wholly without
jurisdiction and unenforceable. There may be exceptional cases where a court may
compel persons who are not signatories to an arbitration agreement to arbitrate
provided it is established that the non-signatory(ies) are either claiming through
signatory(ies) or there was clear intention to be bound as parties (see : Chloro
Controls India Private Limited v. Severn Trent Water Purification Inc : (2013) 1 SCC
641). However an arbitrator cannot lift the corporate veil and proceed against non
parties. An arbitration is consensual. It is based on the agreement between parties.
The arbitrator derives his jurisdiction to adjudicate disputes from the consent of
parties, therefore, he is not in a position to enlarge the scope of his influence and
extend his jurisdiction to non-parties by exercise of his limited jurisdiction based on
the consent of parties.
14. Though a court can lift the corporate veil, the same can be done only in
extraordinary circumstances and by due adjudicatory process. It is trite law that an
executing court cannot go behind thedecree; it must be enforced as it is. Thus, it is
not open for a petitioner to claim that although the decree is against one entity it
must be enforced against another. However, there may be cases where it is found that
the assets of the judgement debtor have been secreted, siphoned off, or by a
fraudulent device ostensibly placed outside the control of the judgement debtor, in an
endeavour to frustrate the enforcement of the decree. In such cases, the court is not
powerless to extend its reach to third parties to enforce the decree; however this is
limited for recovering the assets of the judgement debtor. In the event a corporate
facade is used to perpetuate such fraud, the corporate veil may be lifted.” (Emphasis
supplied)
18. In yet another decision of the Delhi High Court in Sudhir Gopi v. Indira Gandhi National Open
University & Anr. reported in (2017) SCC OnLine Del 8345, placing reliance on Oil and Natural Gas
Corporation (supra) and Balmer Lawrie (supra) it was held that an arbitral tribunal does not have
the jurisdiction to lift the corporate veil and pass an award against non-signatories to an arbitration
agreement. It observed that consent of parties is the cornerstone of arbitration and it is from such
arbitration agreement that the arbitral tribunal derives its jurisdiction to render an award. It further
held that in exceptional cases, the non-signatories can be compelled to arbitrate, but that it is only
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
13
the courts who are empowered to refer them to arbitrate and that the arbitral tribunals have no
power or jurisdiction to do so as its jurisdiction is confined by the arbitration agreement. The
relevant observations read as under: -
“11. “Like consummated romance, arbitration rests on consent”. The agreement
between parties to resolve their disputes by arbitration is the cornerstone of
arbitration. The arbitral tribunal derives its jurisdiction from the consent of parties
(other than statutory arbitrations). In absence of such consent, the arbitral tribunal
would have no jurisdiction to make an award and the award so rendered would,
plainly, be of no value. [...] xxx xxx xxx
16. There may be cases where courts can compel non signatory (ies) to arbitrate.
These may be on grounds of (a) implied consent and/or (b) disregard of corporate
personality. In cases of implied consent, the consent of non signatory (ies) to
arbitrate is inferred from the conduct and intention of the parties. Thus, in cases
where it is apparent that the non-signatory (ies) intended to be bound by the
arbitration agreements, the courts have referred such non-
signatories to arbitration.
xxx xxx xxx
20. The courts would, undoubtedly, have the power to determine whether in a given case the
corporate veil should be pierced and the persons behind the corporate façade be held accountable
for the obligations of the corporate entity. However as stated earlier, an arbitral tribunal, has no
jurisdiction to lift the corporate veil; its jurisdiction is confined by the arbitration agreement - which
includes the parties to arbitration - and it would not be permissible for the arbitral tribunal to
expand or extend the same to other persons.
xxx xxx xxx
35. Arbitration agreement can be extended to non-signatories in limited circumstances; first, where
the Court comes to the conclusion that there is an implied consent and second, where there are
reasons to disregard the corporate personality of a party, thus, making the shareholder(s)
answerable for the obligations of the company. In the present case, the arbitral tribunal has
proceeded to disregard the corporate personality of UEIT. The arbitral tribunal has lifted the
corporate veil only for the reason that UEIT's business was being conducted by Mr. Sudhir Gopi who
was also the beneficiary of its business being the absolute shareholder (barring a single share held
by Mr. Fikri) of UEIT. This is clearly impermissible and militates against the law settled since the
nineteenth century. Any party dealing with the limited liability company is fully aware of the
limitations of corporate liability. Business are organised on the fundamental premise that a
company is an independent juristic entity notwithstanding that its shareholders and directors
exercise the ultimate control on the affairs of the company. In law, the corporate personality cannot
be disregarded. Undisputedly, there are exceptions to this rule and the question is whether this case
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
14
falls within the scope of any exceptions.
36. A corporate veil can be pierced only in rare cases where the Court comes to the conclusion that
the conduct of the shareholder is abusive and the corporate façade is used for an improper purpose,
for perpetuating a fraud, or for circumventing a statute.” (Emphasis supplied)
19. The Madras High Court in V.G. Santhosam v. Shanthi Gnanasekaran reported in 2020 SCC
OnLine Mad 560, was called upon to examine whether an arbitral tribunal has the jurisdiction to
pass an order impleading a non- signatory to an arbitration agreement, with a view to enable such
non- signatory to participate in the arbitration proceedings. In the said case, there was a dispute
amongst the partners of a firm which came to be referred to arbitration. In the arbitration
proceedings the respondent therein filed an application for her impleadment on the ground that she
is the legal heir of one of the erstwhile partners and thus entitled to his share into the firm. The
arbitral tribunal allowed the application and impleaded the respondent by taking recourse to the
powers provided under Order I Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for short, the “CPC”).
In appeal, the Madras High Court held as follows: -
(i) First, that there is no express provision under the Act, 1996 that allows for
impleadment of a third-party, and as such any order of impleadment by an arbitral
tribunal can at best be considered to be an interim measure in terms of Section 17 of
the Act, 1996. However, since Section 17 contemplates exercise of only those powers
provided within the scope of the arbitral proceedings and by extension within the
ambit of Act, 1996, the order of the arbitral tribunal in impleading a third-person
unconnected with the dispute between the parties of arbitration was impermissible
and in violation of the scheme of the Act, 1996. Placing reliance on Section 2(h) and 7
of the Act, 1996 respectively, the High Court held that since “party” has been defined
to mean only a party to the “arbitration agreement”, the arbitral tribunal in exercise
of its powers under Section 17 could not have impleaded the respondent therein, who
was not a party to the arbitration agreement. The relevant observations read as
under: -
“60. Section 17 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, provides interim
measures ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal. The impleading petition is entertained
under Section 17(1)(ii)(e), which states that “such other interim measure of
protection as may appear to the arbitral tribunal to be just and convenient”. By
invoking the said provision of Law, the Tribunal can pass any order regarding interim
measures. There is no express provision for impleadment in the Act. In the absence of
any such express provision, the Arbitrator impliedly could entertain the impleading
petition only under Section 17(1)(ii)(e) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
However, the said provision indicates that the power is to be exercised within the
ambit of the Act and cannot be extended so as to exercise an inherent power by
invoking the Code of Civil Procedure. Thus, the very findings of the Arbitrator by
exercising wide powers under Order I, Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure, he
entertained the impleading petition is absolutely untenable and beyond the scope of
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
15
the arbitral proceedings as well as the Act itself. Any interim measure is to be granted
within the scope of the arbitral proceedings and not beyond the dispute raised
between the parties for arbitration. Therefore, the very exercise of power to implead a
third person who is unconnected with the Partnership Deed is improper and in
violation of the very Scheme of the Act itself.
61. It is pertinent to note that Section 2(h) of the Arbitration Act defines “Party
means a party to an Arbitration Agreement”. When the definition for the word ‘Party’
is provided under the Act, then no other party other than the party to the “Arbitration
Agreement” is entitled to participate in the arbitral proceedings. The term
‘Arbitration Agreement’ is defined under Section 2(b) as an agreement referred to in
Section 7 of the Act. Section 7(1) of the Act, stipulates that Arbitration Agreement
means “an agreement by the parties to submit to arbitration all or certain disputes
which have arisen or which may arise between them in respect of a defined legal
relationship, whether contractual or not.” Thus, the Arbitrator has committed an
error in interpreting the scope of the Act and allowed the impleading petition in
violation of the very Scheme and the provisions of the Act.
63. Section 2(1)(b) of the Act defines ‘Arbitration Agreement’ as an agreement
referred to in Section 7 and Section 7 provides that an Arbitration Agreement is an
agreement between the parties to submit all or any of the disputes to be adjudicated
by an Arbitrator in respect of their definite legal relationship whether contractual or
not.
Section 7 contemplates that the agreement should be in writing and signed by the parties. Therefore,
a non-
signatory or a third party could not be subjected to arbitration. Only in exceptional cases like the
case whether the rights of the parties are flowing under the Arbitration Agreement, third parties
could be subjected to arbitration. The Court is required to examine the exceptions from the
touchstone of direct relationship of the party signatories to the contract.” (Emphasis supplied)
(ii) Secondly, that Section 16 of the Act, 1996 cannot be interpreted in such a manner to allow any
third-party to the arbitration agreement to have itself impleaded and get its rights or dispute
adjudicated. It held that Section 16 contemplates the competence of the Arbitral Tribunal to only
rule on its jurisdiction as regards the existence or validity of the arbitration agreement, and cannot
enter upon adjudication on the civil rights of the parties.
“78. The sole object of the Arbitration Act is to resolve the disputes as expeditiously as possible with
the minimum intervention of the Court of Law. The scope of Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)
cannot be expanded so as to usurp the inherent powers of Civil Courts. Section 16 cannot be
interpreted so as to entertain an application from any person, who is a third party to the Arbitration
Agreement for the purpose of arbitral adjudications and competence of the Arbitral Tribunal to Rule
of its Jurisdiction would indicate that the Arbitral Tribunal may rule on its own jurisdiction,
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
16
including ruling on any objections with respect to the existence or validity of the Arbitration
Agreement and for that purpose, the Tribunal may consider the facts and the terms and conditions
of the agreement. Section 16(2) states that “a plea that the Arbitral Tribunal does not have
jurisdiction shall be raised not later than the submission of the statement of defence”.
80. This Court is of the considered opinion that even such a right is traceable in favour of the first
respondent, then the only possible course would be to approach the Competent Court of Law and
establish her legal right, if any, available based on the documents or the evidences. Civil rights are to
be established independently before the Competent Civil Court by the parties. However, such civil
rights cannot be adjudicated or enforced by the Arbitrator in the contracted arbitration proceedings
under the provisions of the Act. If an Arbitrator is allowed to adjudicate the civil rights of the parties
or the rights regarding inheritance of properties, then it would result in submerger of the very
Arbitration Agreement.
84. Even after impleadment, the possible disputes to be raised by the first respondent in the
arbitration proceedings are that she is the legal heir of late Mr. V.G. Panneerdas and therefore, she
is entitled to be a partner in the partnership firm in her capacity as a legal heir. This Court is
doubtful, whether such a dispute affecting the rights of all other legal heirs shall be adjudicated by
the Arbitrator in the arbitration proceedings. Considering the scope of the arbitration proceedings
and taking note of the rights of the legal heirs of late Mr. V.G. Panneerdas and the terms and
conditions of the Partnership Deed as well as the disputes raised under the Arbitration Act, it is
highly improper on the part of the learned Arbitrator to adjudicate the civil rights of the parties
under the General Laws. In such an event, the Arbitrator would be travelling beyond the scope of the
Arbitration Act and such a power is not vested with an Arbitrator under the provisions of the
Arbitration Act, 1996.
85. Therefore, the civil rights of the parties are to be established before the Competent Court of Law.
The disputes raised under the Arbitration Act alone can be adjudicated by the Arbitrator by
exercising the powers conferred under the Act. The Arbitrator cannot be equated with the Court of
Law and this proposition is well settled as the Arbitrator is a creator of the Statute and has no
inherent power, which exists in the Civil Court and the Arbitrator cannot exercise the inherent
power and has to exercise the powers strictly within the ambit of the Arbitration Act and certainly
not beyond the scope of the arbitration proceedings.
105. [...] However, such Alternative Dispute Resolution processes would not confer any power to the
Arbitrator to decide the civil rights of a third person, who is not a party to the Arbitration
Agreement. Alternative Dispute Resolution mechanism would not provide any competency to
exercise the inherent power conferred to the competent Civil Court of Law. The Alternative Dispute
Resolution processes with reference to the Statute is to be exercised within the ambit of the
provisions and not to decide the civil rights of the citizen. In such an event, we are converting the
Alternative Dispute Resolution System as the Court of Law and such a practice would be dangerous
as the Arbitrators are appointed based on contract basis and by consent of the parties and the
remuneration to the Arbitrator is also paid by the parties to the Arbitration Agreement. When the
Arbitrators are receiving their remuneration from the parties to the Arbitration Agreement, which is
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
17
contractual in nature, they are bound to act as a neutral person between the parties to the agreement
and resolve the disputes raised between those parties. In the event of allowing the Arbitrator to
exercise the powers beyond the scope of the Arbitration Act, then the Arbitrator would be exercising
the inherent powers of the Court, so as to grant the relief to a person, who is not a party to the
Arbitration Agreement and the very nature of the arbitration proceedings do not permit such a
situation.
(Emphasis supplied)
(iii) Lastly, that an arbitrator is a statutory creature of the Act, 1996 and its scope, powers and
jurisdiction is confined all but to the statutory provisions of the said Act. An arbitrator cannot travel
beyond the statute and the arbitration agreement in such a manner so as to usurp the jurisdiction of
civil courts. As such an arbitral tribunal cannot exercise the inherent powers conferred upon
national courts such as under Order I Rule 10 of the CPC, and is bound to function only within the
scope of the Act, 1996 and adjudicate disputes between parties to the “arbitration agreement” in
terms of the said Act. A power which is not contemplated under the Act, 1996 cannot be exercised by
an arbitral tribunal. It observed that if such concept of power to impleadment is provided to the
arbitrator then not only would it lead to widening the scope of arbitration proceeding but also would
defeat the very purpose of the Act, 1996 i.e., the adjudication between the consenting parties to the
arbitration agreement with a defined contractual legal relationship. The relevant observations read
as under: -
“77. The above proposition of law laid down by the Courts would reveal that the
Arbitrator cannot exercise an inherent power conferred to the Civil Courts under the
Code of Civil Procedure. The Arbitrator is bound to function within the scope and
ambit of the Act and resolve the disputes between the contracted parties to the
Arbitration Agreement as defined under the Act. Travelling beyond the scope of the
Act is impermissible and if such an exercise is made, then the same would result in
exercise of excess jurisdiction and finally the Arbitrator would be functioning as a
Civil Court, which is not intended under the provisions of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996. When the Arbitrator is appointed under the Statute, scope,
powers and jurisdiction shall be within the provisions of the said Statute. The
Arbitrator is not empowered to travel beyond the scope of such powers and in the
event of such an exercise, the same would cause prejudice to either of the parties to
the Arbitration Agreement and this apart, certain common civil rights cannot be
decided by the Arbitrator.
81. The Arbitrator is a person appointed in order to resolve the dispute between the
parties under certain terms and conditions in the Arbitration Agreement. The
disputes between the parties are definite and existence of Arbitration Agreement is
an essential one, while-so, the Arbitrator cannot invoke the powers contemplated
under Order 1, Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure, wherein wide powers are
granted, so as to implead a person, which is otherwise unconnected with the
partnership or in the Arbitration Agreement. If such a concept of power to
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
18
impleadment is provided to the Arbitrator, then the scope of arbitration proceedings
will be, not only widened but, the purpose and the object of the Act, would be
defeated. Thus, the Arbitrator is empowered to adjudicate the disputes strictly with
reference to the Arbitration Agreement and with the consent of the parties to the
Arbitration Agreement.
Contrary to the contractual agreement between the parties, the Arbitrator cannot exercise any
powers so as to implead a third party to the Arbitration Agreement for the purpose of adjudicating
the right of any such third party.
83. However, the Arbitrator usurped the wide powers conferred under Order 1, Rule 10 of the Code
of Civil Procedure and impleaded the first respondent for the purpose of adjudicating the disputes
aroused through an Arbitration Agreement. It violates the very contractual obligation between the
Arbitrator as well as the parties to the Arbitration Agreement under the provisions of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996. The Arbitrator in the event of exercising such wide powers under the
Code of Civil Procedure, the same would infringe the rights of other parties, which cannot be
adjudicated in the arbitration proceedings.
85. Therefore, the civil rights of the parties are to be established before the Competent Court of Law.
The disputes raised under the Arbitration Act alone can be adjudicated by the Arbitrator by
exercising the powers conferred under the Act. The Arbitrator cannot be equated with the Court of
Law and this proposition is well settled as the Arbitrator is a creator of the Statute and has no
inherent power, which exists in the Civil Court and the Arbitrator cannot exercise the inherent
power and has to exercise the powers strictly within the ambit of the Arbitration Act and certainly
not beyond the scope of the arbitration proceedings.
99. The spirit of the order passed by the Arbitrator with reference to the Arbitration Act is to be
considered by this Court. The above findings would reveal that the Arbitrator has made an initiation
to decide the legal rights of the parties, including the rights of the first respondent. The Arbitrator in
express terms held that the impleadment of party, provisions contained in the Code of Civil
Procedure through Order 1, Rule 10 gives a wide power to a Court and in our context, the same must
apply to an Arbitral Tribunal. Such a conclusion arrived by the Arbitral Tribunal is undoubtedly an
exercise of inherent power, which is impermissible in law. The power which is not contemplated
under the Arbitration Act, cannot be exercised by the Arbitral Tribunal. The power being statutory
in character, the inherent power is not vested. While-so, the Arbitrator cannot invoke the provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure for the purpose of impleading a third person into the arbitral
proceedings and he is bound to be strict with reference to the contracted Arbitration Agreement as
well as the parties to the Arbitration Agreement and the adjudication must be within the parameters
of the disputes raised between the parties to the Arbitration Agreement.
102. In the order impugned, the Arbitrator arrived a conclusion that the impleadment of the first
respondent will help to secure a comprehensive adjudication of the extent to which the heirs of the
parents, who were partners during the respective lifetime could claim right or not. Such a broad
exercise of power invoked by the Arbitrator for the purpose of determining the civil rights of a
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
19
person is beyond the scope of the provisions of the Arbitration Act. If the Arbitrator is appointed
under the Arbitration Act is allowed to decide the civil rights of a person, who is otherwise not a
party to the Arbitration Agreement, then the Arbitrator would be exercising the inherent power
conferred to the Civil Court, which is not contemplated.” (Emphasis supplied)
20. In Arupri Logistics Pvt. Ltd. v. Vilas Gupta & Ors. reported in (2023) SCC OnLine Del 4297 a
family arrangement had been drawn between the respondents therein whereby their business
holdings and properties were bifurcated into two distinct groups. Sometime thereafter, dispute
cropped up between the two respondent groups as regards a parcel of land alleged to have been sold
to the appellants therein in violation of the terms of the family arrangement and without proper
authorization. Since, the family arrangement contained an arbitration clause, a sole arbitrator was
appointed by the referral court to resolve the said dispute between the respondent groups therein.
The appellants therein were never arrayed as parties in the proceedings before the referral court,
and it was only when one of the respondents therein moved an application before the arbitral
tribunal for seeking impleadment of the appellants therein, that they were arrayed in the arbitration
proceeding. The Sole arbitrator allowed the said application and impleaded the appellants therein.
In appeal, the Delhi High Court held that the arbitral tribunal’s power to implead does not flow from
the provisions of the Act and that it being a creature of the Act, 1996 and the arbitration agreement
cannot assume powers other than those conferred upon it. It can neither join or delete parties that
were never referred to arbitration by the referral court. The said decision is in four- parts: -
(i) First, although Section 19 of the Act, 1996 permits the arbitral tribunal to
formulate the procedure to be followed in accordance with the CPC yet it does not
mean that all powers that are ordinarily vested in a national court by the CPC could
also be said to have been conferred upon the arbitration tribunal which have
otherwise not been provided by the statute. The power to implead has been explicitly
conferred upon a court in terms of Order I Rule 10, and in the absence of any such
provision in the Act, 1996, the power to conduct proceedings under Section 19
sub-section (3) of the Act, 1996 can neither be construed as a source of power of the
arbitral tribunal to join parties nor can such power be readily inferred due to its
nature of militating against the very consensual scheme of arbitration. The relevant
observations read as under: -
“58. As this Court reads Section 19(1), it finds that all that the said provision purports
to achieve is to unfetter an AT from the rigors of procedure as embodied in the two
statutes noticed above. While it may still be open for the AT to seek guidance and
regulate its procedure bearing in mind the underlying principles flowing through the
provisions of the CPC or the Evidence Act, that would not be liable to be read as
either conferring additional powers upon an AT or arming it with the plethora of
powers that may be otherwise specifically conferred upon courts in terms of those
statutes.
59. The power to implead stands conferred upon a court specifically in terms of Order
I Rule 10 of the CPC. The aforesaid power is introduced in the CPC to enable the
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
20
court to either strike out the name of parties or join parties whose presence in its
opinion is necessary in order to enable it to effectively adjudicate upon and settle all
questions involved. What needs to be remembered is that the power to implead
stands vested in a court under the CPC by virtue of an express conferral of power in
terms of Order I Rule 10(2). The power to implead and join has not been understood
to exist in Section 151 of the CPC and which deals with inherent powers.
60. The position which emerges from the aforesaid discussion is that the power to
implead is one which stands specifically conferred by virtue of a provision duly
incorporated in the CPC. The power stands placed in the hands of a court in order to
enable it to effectively resolve disputes and arrive at a just settlement of questions
that stand raised before it. However, and contrary to the above, the Act fails to
incorporate a power to implead insofar as the AT is concerned. The power to conduct
proceedings in a manner considered appropriate and which is recognised by Section
19(3) also cannot possibly be stretched to be read as a source of the authority of an
AT to join parties.
61. It is relevant to note that the discretion conferred on an AT to formulate the
procedure to be followed in proceedings which it proposes to initiate cannot be
extended to contemplate joinder of persons who are not signatories to an arbitration
agreement. This more so since the joinder of parties which may otherwise not be
signatories to an arbitration agreement raises substantive issues. The impleadment of
a party in arbitral proceedings results in that individual or entity becoming bound by
an award, interim or final, that may be rendered by the AT even though it may have
never consented to seek resolution of questions by that tribunal. The impleadment of
a party unilaterally by the AT thus results in a non-signatory being subjected to the
authority of that tribunal and accepting its right to adjudicate upon disputes even
though it may have never consented to subject itself to the authority of the said AT.
This would clearly militate against the principle of “party consent” which forms the
very foundation of arbitration.” (Emphasis supplied)
(ii) Secondly, an arbitral tribunal owes its existence to the arbitration agreement and
is essentially a designated private forum for resolving the disputes between the
parties to such agreement and as such is detached from the hierarchy of ‘courts’. Its
genesis flows from the arbitration agreement and upon its constitution, the arbitral
tribunal is governed by such agreement and the contours of the Act, 1996 only.
The idea of vesting of inherent powers have been recognized only for adjudicatory institutions such
as national court’s whose genesis and by extension their powers flows from their right to act as a
matter of justice and hence, the vesting of such powers to meet the ends of justice. However, an
arbitration tribunal cannot be equated to a national court since it derives its power to adjudicate
from an express and private conferral of authority by parties through an agreement, and thus, there
can be no vesting of an inherent power. Any authority that has been conferred upon the arbitral
tribunal by the parties can only be exercised within the confines of the Act, 1996. The relevant
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
21
observations read as under: -
“63. [...] an AT owes its genesis to parties resolving to confer authority on a person or
an institution to render an award and adjudicate upon disputes that may arise. While
the courts may intervene by virtue of the provisions of Section 11 of the Act, they do
so only in cases where parties are unable to agree upon the constitution of an AT.
However, even where the courts do constitute an AT by virtue of Section 11, the
person or institution so designated remains a private forum which springs into
existence principally in light of the agreement of parties and their resolve to have
their disputes decided by that tribunal.
64. An AT constituted either upon consensus of parties or consequent to intervention
by courts remains a forum outside the ordinary hierarchy of legal institutions on
which the justice dispensation system of our nation rests. It owes its genesis to the
agreement between the parties and upon its constitution comes to be governed by the
provisions of the Act. It is thus not an adjudicatory institution which can claim to be
vested with inherent powers.
65. Inherent powers are those which have been recognised to inhere in courts
forming part of the formal hierarchy of legal institutions and which may be
compendiously referred to as national courts. AT's thus constitute forums outside the
circuit of national courts and remain to be institutions which owe their existence
principally to the agreement between parties. [...]
66. [...] An AT remains an institution which comes to be constituted merely on the
basis of a private agreement between parties. It must also be remembered that the
inherent power recognised to exist in courts flows from their right to act ex debito
justitiae. The power to do so has always been recognised to exist in national courts
with Section 151 of the CPC merely recognizing and reaffirming that power inhering
in courts. [...]
67. What the Court seeks to highlight is the superior powers which are recognised to
exist in national courts as opposed to ATs’ generally. Statutes while according
recognition to the inherent powers recognised to exist in national courts accept such
a supervening power inhering in those courts and which enables them to pass such
orders as would subserve the ends of justice. AT's on the other hand derive the power
to adjudicate based on an express conferral of authority by parties to an agreement.
Even where parties confer a power on the AT to arbitrate, that conferral must be
within the contours of the applicable law. [...]” (Emphasis supplied)
(iii) Thirdly, it held that the power to implead a party could also not be said to flow
from either Section(s) 16 or 17 of the Act, 1996 respectively.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
22
The doctrine of kompetenz-kompetenz enshrined in Section 16 that enables the arbitral tribunal to
rule on any jurisdictional objection such as the existence or validity of the arbitration agreement is
confined or limited only to the objections raised by the parties before it by virtue of the arbitration
agreement. It cannot be regarded as a source of power to implead parties. Similarly, the power to
pass interim measures under Section 17 of the Act, 1996 cannot possibly encompass the power to
implead or join a third-party to the arbitration proceedings, as such impleadment or joinder are not
interim or interlocutory in nature, since the exercise of such power in essence also makes the
third-party to be bound by all other subsequent findings and the ultimate award of the tribunal that
may be rendered apart from the ‘interim order’. The relevant observations read as under: -
“68. We also find ourselves unable to recognize the power to implead as flowing from
Sections 16 or 17 of the Act. Section 16 as is manifest from its plain language
empowers the AT to rule on its own jurisdiction. It is in essence an adoption of the
kompetenz-kompetenz principle as recognized to inhere in AT's. The power to rule on
jurisdiction or on objections with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration
agreement cannot possibly be recognized as a source of power to implead parties. It is
essentially concerned with the right of the AT to rule on any jurisdictional objection
that may be raised by parties before it. The authority to render a decision on a
jurisdictional question or challenge that may be raised cannot be stretched to infer a
power to join parties to the arbitration proceedings.
69. Insofar as Section 17 is concerned, none of the interim measures of protections
which are spelt out in clauses (a) to (e) of Section 17(1)(ii) deal with or confer
authority upon the AT to join non-signatories. At least none of those clauses explicitly
speak of a power to implead. The power to frame an interim measure which may be
considered to be “just and convenient” and which is spoken of in clause
(e) also cannot be justifiably extended as embodying a power to implead. This since
Section 17 fundamentally deals with “interim measures”. The impleadment or the
joinder of a party to arbitral proceedings cannot be construed to be an order which
may be termed as either interim or interlocutory. This since the moment a party is
joined in the proceedings, it becomes bound by the award which may be ultimately
rendered by the AT.
70. This Court also finds itself unable to recognize a power to implead being liable to
be read in Section 17 merely because post its amendment by Act 3 of 2016 the AT now
stands empowered to grant interim measures at par with the power which stands
vested in courts in terms of Section 9 of the Act. The clear intent underlying the
amendment to Section 17 is to enable AT's to frame interim measures from a position
of equivalence with courts. The amendment to Section 17 appears to have been
motivated solely by the felt need to save courts from being deluged with applications
for interim relief. However, one must not lose sight of the fact that both Section 17 as
well as Section 9 continue to deal with interim measures. The power to join a party
and thus subject it to the ultimate decision and award that may be rendered by the
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
23
AT cannot be conceived to be a component of the power to frame interim orders
under Section 17. The Court in this respect concurs with the view expressed by the
Madras High Court and reflected in Paras 127-134 of Abhibus as well as the legal
position as enunciated and explained in Paras 81 and 99 of V.G. Santhosam.
(Emphasis supplied)
(iv) Lastly, it observed that although various principles such as ‘alter ego’ or ‘group of companies’
have been recognized to compel a third-party to partake in the arbitration proceedings, yet such
principles have been invoked only in the context of Section(s) 8 or 45 of the Act, 1996 respectively
which empowers a judicial authority to make a reference to arbitration. Since both these provisions
uses the phrase “a party to the arbitration agreement or any person claiming through or under him”
unlike Section 2(1)(h) that defines “party” to include only “a party to an arbitration agreement”, it
necessarily meant that it is only the courts that have the power to refer even a non-signatory to
arbitration by resorting to such principles. However, an arbitral tribunal is only limited to
adjudicate between parties to an arbitration agreement in terms of Section 2(1)(h) of the Act, 1996.
The relevant observations read as under: -
“72. Although that Report was submitted in August 2014 and various amendments
have been introduced in the Act thereafter, Section 2(1)(h) has remained unchanged.
The meaning to be ascribed to the word “party” as appearing in the Act at different
places has come to be expanded only in Section 8 which in terms of the Arbitration
and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 incorporates the phrase “a party to the
arbitration agreement or any person claiming through or under him”. The only other
provision in which the word “parties” was further extended is Section 45 which too
incorporates the phrase “or any person claiming through or under him”. However,
and significantly, both Sections 8 and 45 deal with powers conferred on a “judicial
authority” as opposed to an AT.
Insofar as the AT is concerned therefore, it would be the provisions of Section 2(1)(h) alone which
would apply.
91. However, and while the decision of the larger Bench is still awaited, this Court finds that the
various decisions rendered on the subject and as were noticed in Cox & Kings essentially related to
cases where courts were called upon to invoke those theories and hold parties, who even though may
not have been signatories to the arbitration agreement, to be bound by the same. In fact, some of the
decisions which were noticed in Cox & Kings had been rendered in the context of Section 45 which,
as was noticed above, specifically employs the expression “any person claiming through or under
him”. The more fundamental question which remains to be answered by the Court is whether an AT
would be justified in invoking those doctrines. This Court is of the firm opinion for reasons which
are set out hereinafter that such a power cannot be recognised to inhere in an AT.” (Emphasis
supplied) Accordingly, the Delhi High Court concluded that since an arbitral tribunal owes its origin
to the arbitration agreement providing for resolution of disputes between the parties to such
agreement in a private forum outside the ordinary hierarchy of judicial authorities, the arbitration
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
24
agreement alone, along with the intended applicable statutory laws constitute the body of laws
within which the arbitral tribunal may exercise its powers. The arbitral tribunal cannot arrogate to
itself powers which are neither conferred by the statute or the rules which govern the arbitration nor
can it take recourse to inherent powers that ordinarily vests within a judicial authority. Even in
exceptional cases where the scope of arbitration may be expanded to include even non- signatories,
any such power to do so has been expressly conferred by the legislature only upon courts within the
Act, 1996 by appropriate legislative insertions to the term “party”. The relevant observations read as
under: -
“92. As was held hereinbefore, the AT owes its origin principally to well recognised
and identifiable sources. The principal source would be the agreement in terms of
which parties may have resolved for all disputes being referred to an AT and thus
choose a forum falling outside the circuit of national courts and the ordinary
hierarchy of judicial authorities. The other would be rules framed by a body where
the agreement contemplates institutional arbitration. Last but not the least would be
the statutory laws framed by countries which are intended to govern and regulate
ATs’. The agreement, institutional rules or national statutes would thus constitute the
code or the body of laws specifying the powers that may be available to be exercised
by the AT. As was pertinently observed by Redfern and Hunter, parties cannot by
agreement invest powers upon an AT which are otherwise reserved to be exercised by
courts and judicial institutions created by the State.
93. What needs to be emphasised is that an AT cannot arrogate to itself powers which
are neither conferred by the statute or the rules which govern the arbitration nor can
it take recourse to inherent powers, which as has been found hereinabove, are
acknowledged to inhere in courts and judicial authorities only.
The AT, cannot, therefore, expropriate for itself powers which are vested solely in judicial
institutions. It remains bound by the provisions of the statutes which prevail and which in this case
undisputedly is the Act. In the absence of a power of impleadment having been conferred upon the
AT in terms thereof, it would have no authority or jurisdiction to join or implead parties to the
proceedings. The Court has already found that the power to implead cannot be sustained or traced
to Sections 16 or 17 or 19 of the Act. In fact, the Act incorporates no provision which could be even
remotely considered as being liable to be read as being the repository of the power of the AT to
implead.
94. The Act, wherever it was intended to expand the meaning to be ascribed to the word “party” has
done so by introducing specific provisions in that respect. Even where such recourse was taken, the
power has come to be conferred upon a judicial authority. If the AT were recognised to have the
authority to invoke the alter ego or group of companies principles, it would undoubtedly result in
the Court recognising a power vesting in the AT to compel the presence of a party who had never, at
least ostensibly, agreed or conceded to its jurisdiction or authority to decide. Such a party would
necessarily be one who had not even made party to the proceedings by the referral court. This would
clearly result in the AT seeking to exercise authority over a party and compelling it to join the
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
25
proceedings even though it may have never been ad idem on disputes being resolved by way of
arbitration. This would not only result in the AT travelling far beyond the contours of the arbitration
agreement but negate against the fundamental tenet of arbitration which is founded on consensus
and agreement. The Court for all the aforesaid reasons, thus, finds itself unable to countenance the
position as taken by the Sole Arbitrator in the present case.
95. Quite apart from the Court having found for reasons aforenoted that the AT stands conferred
with no authority to implead or join parties, a reading of the impugned order would clearly appear
to indicate that the Sole Arbitrator has proceeded to join the appellants on considerations which are
recognized to constitute the basis for the exercise of power under Order I Rule 10 of the CPC.
However, the Sole Arbitrator has failed to bear in mind that the Act confers no authority upon an AT
to wield powers akin to Order I Rule 10 of the CPC as specifically conferred on national courts. We
have also found for reasons aforenoted that Section 19(2) cannot be read as enabling the AT to adopt
Order I Rule 10 of the CPC.” (Emphasis supplied) II. Decisions holding that the Arbitral Tribunal
has the power to Implead a non-signatory to the Arbitration Agreement.
21. While on one hand the Delhi High Court along with the Bombay High Court and the Madras
High Court have taken the view that it is only the courts who have the power to implead a
non-signatory to partake in arbitration and that such power is not vested in an arbitral tribunal, the
High Court of Gujarat on the other hand, speaking through Akhil Kureshi J. (as he then was) in
IVRCL Ltd. v. Gujarat State Petroleum Corporation Ltd. reported in 2015 GUJHC 31651 DB
observed albeit in the context of scope of Section 9 of the Act, 1996, more particularly whether an
injunction would be maintainable against a non-signatory, that it is no longer res-integra that even a
non-signatory to an arbitral agreement can be subjected to arbitration proceedings. Placing reliance
on the decision of this Court in Chloro Controls (supra), it was held that the courts have recognized
various instances where even a non-signatory to an arbitration agreement can be allowed to be
joined in the arbitration proceedings by way of principle of alter-ego, apparent authority, agency or
group of companies etc. It observed that such instances are premised on the ‘implied consent’ of the
third-party to the arbitration agreement and thus, it would be futile to say that a non-signatory to an
arbitration agreement can be compelled to submit to the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal so
validly constituted. In the last, it observed that whether a particular case is a fit one for enjoining a
third-party on the aforesaid principles would be for the arbitral tribunal to determine, being the
appropriate forum by examining the facts of each case, an exercise which is neither possible nor
proper for the courts to embark upon. The relevant observations read as under: -
“13. It is no longer res integra that in given set of circumstances, even a non-signatory
to an arbitral agreement can be subjected to arbitration proceedings. Such instances
may be rare and may arise in special facts of the case and would ordinarily provide an
exception to the normal rule, that only a signatory to the arbitral proceedings can be
compelled to submit to the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal. Nevertheless,
instances have been recognized by Courts where either on the ground of piercing
corporate veil as one entity found to be the alter ego of the other or some such similar
ground, even a non-signatory entity to an arbitration agreement is allowed to be
joined in the arbitration proceedings. As noted, in case of Chloro Controls (I) P. Ltd.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
26
(supra), the law on the point was discussed at length by 3 Judge Bench of the
Supreme Court and it was concluded that various legal basis may be applied to bind a
non-signatory to an arbitration agreement. Such instances would be of that of
implied consent, third party beneficiaries, guarantors, assignment and other transfer
mechanisms of contractual rights. Such theory relies on the discernible intentions of
the parties and to a large extent, on good faith principle. The second stream of cases
would be included in the legal doctrines of agent-principal relations, apparent
authority, piercing of veil, joint venture relations, succession and estoppel. It was
observed that this principle does not rely on the parties’ intention but rather on the
force of the applicable law. It would therefore be futile to argue that in no case, a
non-signatory to an arbitration agreement can be compelled to submit to the
jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal so validly constituted. Whether in the present
case, facts are such that any of the principles cited above or any other recognized by
judicial precedent would apply or not is neither possible nor proper on our part to
comment upon. Entire issue is pending before the appropriate forum. We would
therefore not be justified in allowing the appeal and vacating the injunction only on
this ground.” (Emphasis supplied)
22. Similarly in IMC Ltd. v. Board of Trustees of Denndayal Port Trust reported in (2018) SCC
OnLine Guj 4972, the Gujrat High Court placing reliance on IVRCL Ltd (supra) held that there is
nothing in the Act, 1996 which precludes or prohibits an arbitral tribunal from lifting the
corporate-veil and pursuant thereto impleading even a non-signatory to arbitration proceedings.
Expressing its disagreement with the views of the Bombay High Court and the Delhi High Court in
Sudhir Gopi (supra) and Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd (supra) respectively, it held that
except for a limited sphere of fields involving disputes which are non-arbitrable, the arbitral tribunal
is well-empowered to take up all other disputes and issues thereto which would necessarily also
include the issue of lifting the corporate veil to enjoin a non- signatory to the arbitration. Whether a
case is made out for impleading a third- party (sic non-signatory) or not would be a matter for the
arbitral tribunal being the proper designated forum for adjudication of disputes, keeping in mind
the facts of each case and the position of law. It further observed that both the recognition of such
power of an arbitral tribunal AND the non- issuance of a notice of invocation in terms of Section 21
of the Act, 1996 to the third-party sought to be impleaded will hardly occasion any prejudice, as it is
always open to such a third-party to challenge its impleadment by way of an application under
Section 16 of the Act, 1996. The relevant observations read as under: -
“23. Reverting to the facts of the case on hand, it is to be noticed that the order
passed by the learned Arbitral Tribunal clearly records that opinion expressed is
prima-facie and subject to objections and remedies available under the Arbitration
Act to the impleaded respondent, i.e. the appellant herein. If the appellant claims that
it is not a party to the agreement, as such it cannot be impleaded as party respondent
in the arbitration proceedings, it is always open for it to move an application under
Section 16 of the Arbitration Act to rule on its jurisdiction. In view of such remedy
and further remedies available under the law, by ordering impleadment, we are of the
opinion that no prejudice is caused to the appellant. Whether notice is required to be
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
27
issued to a party before ordering impleadment, or not, is a matter which depends on
facts and circumstances of each case. If a strong case is made out for impleadment, it
is always open for the Courts and Tribunals to order impleadment and to give an
opportunity before deciding the main claim. In that view of the matter and having
gone through the case law on the subject as referred above, we are of the view that the
order of the learned Arbitral Tribunal cannot be said to be not in conformity with law
merely on the ground that appellant was not issued notice before passing the order of
its impleadment. Even the learned Single Judge has also rightly rejected the plea of
the appellant for quashing the order of the learned Arbitral Tribunal on the aforesaid
ground.
xxx xxx xxx
45. On hearing the response on the said issues by the learned Senior Counsel Shri
Mihir Thakore and keeping in view of the provisions of the Arbitration Act, 1996, as
also the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of A. Ayyasamy v. A.
Paramasivam reported in (2016) 10 SCC 386, we are not in agreement with the view
taken by the learned Single Judges in the aforesaid judgments in Sudhir Gopi v.
Indira Gandhi National Open University reported in 2017 SCC OnLine Del 8345 and
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. v. Jindal Drilling and Industries Limited
reported in 2015 SCC OnLine Bom 1707.
There is nothing in law which prohibits an Arbitral Tribunal from lifting the corporate veil on the
basis of doctrine of alter ego. The Arbitral Tribunal has a right to take up all disputes which a Court
can undertake, except certain disputes generally treated as non- arbitrable, viz. (i) patent, trade
marks and copyright, (ii) anti- trust/competition laws, (iii) insolvency/winding up, (iv)
bribery/corruption, (v) fraud, (vi) criminal matters. The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, does
not make any provision excluding any category of disputes treating them as non- arbitratble but the
Courts have held that certain kinds of disputes may not be capable of adjudication through means of
arbitration. This issue is elaborately considered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of A.
Ayyasamy v. A. Paramasivam reported in (2016) 10 SCC 386. [...] xxx xxx xxx
47. Further, in the case of IVRCL Limited v. Gujarat State Petroleum Corporation Limited - First
Appeal No. 1714 of 2015 and other allied appeals, decided on 08-13/10/2015, a Division Bench of
this Court held that it is no longer res-integra that in a given set of circumstances, even a
non-signatory to an arbitral agreement can be subjected to arbitration proceedings. It is further
observed that instances have been recognized by Courts where on the ground of piercing corporate
veil, as one entity being found to be an alter ego of the other or on similar grounds, even a
non-signatory entity to an arbitration agreement is allowed to be joined in the arbitration
proceedings. The Division Bench has disapproved the argument that, in no case, a non-signatory to
the arbitration agreement can be compelled to submit to the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal
validly constituted.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
28
48. In view of the aforesaid judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and Division Bench of this
Court, we are not in agreement with the submission made by Shri S.N. Soparkar, learned Senior
Counsel for the appellant, that the learned Arbitral Tribunal has no jurisdiction to examine the issue
by lifting the corporate veil and further, on facts, no case is also made out to examine the claim of
alter ego by lifting the corporate veil. Whether a case is made out for impleading a third party by
applying the doctrine of lifting of corporate veil, is a matter which is to be examined having regard to
facts of each case and keeping in mind the concept of group Companies. [...]” (Emphasis supplied)
23.In NOD Bearing Pvt. Ltd. v. Bhairav Bearing Corporation reported in (2019) SCC OnLine Bom
366 the facts germane for our discussion are that an agreement for supply of ball bearings was
entered into between the petitioner therein and one KBIL group. For facilitation of distribution of
these goods, the petitioner therein entered into a dealership agreement with the respondent therein,
pursuant to which a certificate of distribution came to be issued to the respondent therein by KBIL.
Due to various issues as regards the fulfilment of supply of goods, the KBIL and the petitioner
therein terminated the certificate of distribution and the dealership agreement, respectively with the
respondent therein. Aggrieved by the aforesaid, the respondent therein initiated arbitration against
the petitioner therein inter-alia for the purpose of challenging the aforesaid termination and
claiming damages therefrom. Before the arbitral tribunal one of the key issues canvassed by the
petitioner therein was that the arbitration suffers from a mis-joinder or non-joinder of parties
inasmuch as KBIL had not been impleaded. It contended that the dealership agreement entered into
by it with the respondent therein was only in the capacity of an agent of the KBIL, and thus any
claims arising out of the same must be made against the principal alone i.e., KBIL, who has not been
made a party to the arbitration proceedings. The aforesaid contention came to be rejected by the
arbitral tribunal and ultimately an award was passed against the petitioner therein. In appeal, the
Bombay High Court upholding the decision of the sole arbitrator held that construction and
determination of the scope of agreement so as to determine which parties are necessary to the
proceedings is a matter strictly within the jurisdiction of the arbitrator. It further observed that as
long as the interpretation of the agreement by the arbitrator is reasonable, the courts would refrain
from interfering with the same merely because another view is possible. Although the Bombay High
Court did not make any observations as regards the power of tribunal to implead or join a
non-signatory, yet its observations as to the scope of jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal, more
particularly for determining whether there exists any principal-agent relationship nevertheless is of
significance, which we shall discuss in more detail in the latter parts of this judgment. The relevant
observations read as under: -
“4. Learned Counsel for the Petitioner submits that dealership agreement, which gave
rise to the Respondent's claim, was entered into by the Petitioner as an agent of
KBIL. Learned Counsel submits that the Petitioner having disclosed in the dealership
agreement its principal and its express authority to name a dealer whilst acting for
the principal, namely, KBIL, the Respondent's dealership is not a sub-agency of the
Petitioner, but an agency of the principal itself, namely, KBIL. Learned Counsel relies
on Section 194 read with Section 230 of the Contract Act in this behalf. Based on this
contention, it is further submitted that the claim being in respect of a contract of
agency as between the Respondent and KBIL, the latter was a necessary party for any
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
29
adjudication concerning the agreement. [...] xxx xxx xxx
5. The learned arbitrator rejected the Petitioner's submissions on the ground that the
dealership agreement between the Petitioner and the Respondent was on a principal
to principal basis; though this agreement was in pursuance of its entitlement to
appoint dealers under its main contract of distributorship with KBIL and this
agreement conferred upon KBIL certain rights, in essence, it was an agreement
between the Petitioner and the Respondent. The arbitrator considered various
circumstances to arrive at this conclusion. The arbitrator inter alia observed that
under the dealership agreement, the Respondent was required to place a purchase
order on, and purchase bearings from, the Petitioner and prices were required to be
separately agreed between the Respondent and the Petitioner from time to time.
After considering various clauses of the dealership agreement (in particular, clauses
3(b), 5(a) to (c), 6(a), 7(a), (d), 10, 11(f) and 13 thereof), the arbitrator held that a
holistic reading of the agreement did not show that the Petitioner was merely acting
as an agent of KBIL, whilst entering into the dealership agreement with the
Respondent. The arbitrator relied on the case of Coats Viyella India Ltd. v. India
Cement Ltd. in this behalf. In Coats Viyella India Ltd., the Supreme Court, after
considering the agreement as a whole, had held that under the agreement, a privity of
contract of the appellant was only with the respondent and there was no liability on
the other party, who was claimed to be the principal, to make payment to the
appellant; the agreement was on a principal to principal basis between the appellant
and the respondent, the rights and liabilities of the appellant arising only under the
agreement. Based on the material placed before the learned arbitrator and a
reasonable interpretation of the dealership agreement and application of law, the
arbitrator came to his conclusion that the Petitioner did not act merely as an agent on
behalf of KBIL in entering into the dealership agreement and since the Respondent's
case was that the Petitioner's acts had directly resulted in the Respondent suffering
losses, the proceedings did not suffer from any mis-joinder or non-joinder of
necessary party so as to vitiate the proceedings. This conclusion is clearly a possible
view based on the material placed before the learned arbitrator. Construction of a
contract is a matter strictly within the jurisdiction of the arbitrator, and so long as the
arbitrator construes it on a reasonable interpretation and his construction denotes a
possible view, there is nothing for the challenge court to interfere with under Section
34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (“Act”).
6. There is no denial of the proposition of law laid down by the Supreme Court or our
court in the cases cited by learned Counsel for the Petitioner. Prem Nath Motors
Limited's case (supra) basically considers the effect of Section 230 of the Contract
Act.
In that case, it was held that the agent had acted on behalf of a disclosed principal and there was no
contract to the contrary placed before the court so as to make the agent liable for the act of the
disclosed principal. Even in Vivek Automobiles Limited (supra), the court applied the same
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
30
principle. The principle of law enunciated by the Supreme Court in these cases merely implies that
an agent is not responsible for the acts of a disclosed principal except in case of a contract to the
contrary. The real question in the present case is whether, in so far as the agency agreement between
the Petitioner and the Respondent is concerned, the Petitioner could be said to be merely acting as
an agent of a disclosed principal, namely, KBIL, or was the agreement entered into by the Petitioner
acting in its own rights as a principal. On a reasonable construction of the agreement, the arbitrator
found that it was the latter case and not the former. The arbitrator held that the relevant clauses of
the agreement indicated that the agreement of dealership was entered into by the Petitioner not as
an agent of KBIL, but in its individual capacity on a principal to principal basis. That conclusion, as I
have noted above, is a possible view based on a reasonable interpretation of the agreement.”
(Emphasis supplied)
24.A similar view was taken by the Delhi High Court in Vistrat Real Estates Pvt. Ltd. v. Asian Hotels
North Ltd. reported in (2022) SCC OnLine Del 1139 wherein the issue before the court was whether
the petitioner therein was entitled to initiate arbitration against a third-party who was not a
signatory to the arbitration agreement. The Delhi High Court placing reliance on Chloro Controls
(supra), held that in exceptional cases pertaining to either the principle of ‘composite performance’
or ‘implied authority’. even a third party who is not a signatory to the arbitration agreement can be
joined in arbitration. It further held that at the stage of appointment of an arbitrator in terms of
Section 11 of the Act, 1996, the courts are required only to make a prima-facie determination as
regards the validity or existence of the arbitration agreement only. Once it is found that there is a
valid arbitration agreement in existence, all other issues including whether any relief can be claimed
against a third- party or the necessity for impleading such third party would be a matter to be looked
into only by the arbitral tribunal by virtue of the powers devolved upon it by the principle of
‘kompetenz-kompetenz’. The relevant observations read as under: -
“11. Hon'ble Supreme Court in the decision reported as (2013) 1 SCC 641 Chrolo
Controls India Private Ltd. v. Severn Trent Water Purification Inc. though dealing
with an international arbitration under Section 45 of the Act, held that even third
parties who are not signatories to the arbitration agreement can be joined in
arbitration. It laid down categories where the third parties can be impleaded to the
arbitration and held that the expression ‘claiming through them’ should be construed
strictly. [...]
12. The decision in Chrolo Controls (supra) clearly holds that in exceptional cases
applying the principle of “composite performance” or implied authority, even a third
party who is not a signatory to the arbitration agreement can be joined in arbitration.
13. Hon'ble Supreme Court in Vidya Drolia (supra) further considering the issue as to
who would decide the non-arbitrability of the claim held that there cannot be a
straightforward universal answer. Reiterating the law laid down in Shin Etsu
Chemical Co.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
31
Ltd. v. Aksh Optifibre Ltd., (2005) 7 SCC 234, it was held that the correct approach to the review of
the arbitration agreement is restricted to prima facie finding that there exists an arbitration
agreement that is not null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed. The key rationale
for holding that the courts’ review of the arbitration agreement should be limited to a prima facie
standard is the principle of competence-competence. Further, if the courts are empowered to fully
scrutinise the arbitration agreement, an arbitral proceeding would have to be stayed until such time
that the court seized of the matter renders a decision on the arbitration agreement. This would
defeat the credo and ethos of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act which is to enable expeditious
arbitration without avoidable intervention by the judicial authorities. The rule of priority in favour
of the arbitrators is counterbalanced by the courts’ power to review the existence and validity of the
arbitration agreement at the end of the arbitral process. It was further held that if on a bare perusal
of the agreement it is found that a particular dispute is not relatable to the arbitration agreement,
then, perhaps the court may decide the relief sought for by a party in a Section 11 petition. However,
if there is a contestation with regard to the issue as to whether the dispute falls within the realm of
the arbitration agreement, then the best course would be to allow the arbitrator to form a view in the
matter.
14. Therefore, once a valid arbitration agreement exists between the parties, the issue whether the
petitioner is entitled to any relief in the absence of a third party to the agreement or that third party
is required to be impleaded in the proceedings, is covered by the Doctrine of
Competence-Competence and it will be for the Arbitrator to decide the said issue. Thus, the issue
whether in the absence of a third party, the petitioner can claim the refundable security deposit
would be for the learned Arbitrator to determine.” (Emphasis supplied)
25. In Cardinal Energy and Infra Structure Pvt. Ltd. v. Subramanya Construction and Development
Co. Ltd. reported in (2024) SCC OnLine Bom 964, the Bombay High Court diverging from the views
expressed in its earlier decision of Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. (supra) and the decision of
the Madras High Court in V.G. Santhosam (supra), held that the arbitral tribunal does have the
power or authority to implead a non-signatory even if such impleadment was never sought at the
referral stage. The said decision is in three-parts: -
(i) First, placing reliance on the decision of this Court in Cox and Kings (I) (supra), it
held that the question whether a non-signatory is bound by the arbitration agreement
or not, is for the arbitral tribunal to decide and not the referral court. Thus, even if
the non-signatory was not impleaded at the time of filing of application under Section
11 of the Act, 1996, it would be incorrect to say that the same would exclude the
arbitral tribunal from impleading such party by applying the ‘group of companies’
doctrine on its own accord. The relevant observations read as under: -
“40. The Sole Arbitrator has referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in Cox and
Kings (Supra) where the Supreme Court has enunciated the ‘Group of Companies’
doctrine and in particular the impleadment of a non- signatory to an Arbitration
Agreement in arbitral proceedings based on such doctrine. The Supreme Court in the
said decision has considered a case where an Application was made to the Referral
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
32
Court to join a non- signatory to the Arbitration Agreement and it was in such
scenario that the Supreme Court held that, the Referral Court is required to prima
facie rule on the existence of the Arbitration Agreement and whether the
nonsignatories is a veritable party to the Arbitration Agreement. The Supreme Court
has held that in view of the complexity of such a determination, the Referral Court
should leave it for the Arbitrator to decide, whether the non-signatory party is indeed
a party to the Arbitration Agreement on the basis of the factual evidence and
application of legal doctrine. It is necessary to reproduce paragraphs 171 and 172 of
the said decision [...]
41. Thus from the conclusions of the Supreme Court, it is clear that the Supreme
Court has held that where at a referral stage impleadment of a non-signatory to the
Arbitration Agreement is raised, the Referral Court should leave it for the Arbitral
Tribunal to decide whether the non-
signatory is bound by the Arbitration Agreement. Thus, it is clear that the Arbitral Tribunal has the
power to decide whether the non-signatory is bound by the Arbitration Agreement and to implead
the non-signatory if answered in the affirmative.
42. I do not find from a reading of the decision of the Supreme Court in Cox and Kings Ltd. (Supra)
that merely by there being no prayer for impleadment of a non-
signatory in the Section 11 Application, the applicability of the doctrine of ‘group of companies’ by
the Sole Arbitrator is excluded. [...]” (Emphasis supplied)
(ii) The arbitral tribunal being the appropriate forum to determine the issue as to joinder of a
non-signatory to an arbitration agreement, would undoubtedly have the power to implead such
non-signatory. Although, at the referral stage the court is bound to decide whether there is an
arbitration agreement and whether the parties before it are bound by such agreement or not, yet this
does not preclude the arbitral tribunal from deciding these issues after the proceedings have
commenced on its own accord, particularly when such issues were not conclusively decided by the
courts in the first instance. The relevant observations read as under: -
“42. [...] The Arbitrator does have the power/authority to implead the non-signatory
if such non-signatory is otherwise liable to be impleaded on the basis of the ‘group of
companies’ doctrine. Thus, the Supreme Court has infact considered that the Arbitral
Tribunal is the appropriate forum to determine the issue as to joinder of a non-
signatory to an Arbitration Agreement. I thus find no merit in the submission of Mr.
Rustomjee that in the event the issue of joinder of a non-signatory to an Arbitration
Agreement is not raised before the Referral Court, the Arbitral Tribunal on its own
accord does not have the power to determine this issue and/or allow the
impleadment of a non-signatory to an Arbitration Agreement. I do not find there to
be any estoppel on the Arbitral Tribunal determining this issue.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
33
xxx xxx xxx
44. There have been submissions made by Mr. Rustomjee on the power of the
Referral Court to determine whether the Arbitration Agreement exists and/or validity
of the Arbitration Agreement and which would include whether the Arbitration
Agreement is applicable to non-signatories to the Agreement. The Supreme Court in
National Insurance Company Ltd. (Supra) at paragraph 22 has referred to the issues
which the Chief Justice or his designate is bound to decide and which includes
whether there is an Arbitration Agreement and whether the party who has applied
under Section 11 of the Act is a party to such agreement. However, this will not
preclude the Arbitral Tribunal from deciding the issue of impleadment of a
non-signatory to an Arbitration Agreement, particularly when this issue was not
before the Referral Court. Thus, in my view, the Sole Arbitrator in the present case
was perfectly justified in determining the issue of whether the Petitioners as
non-signatories to the Arbitration Agreement could be impleaded as parties to the
arbitration.
(Emphasis supplied)
(iii) Thirdly, it observed that although the power of impleadment cannot be traced to any provision
of the Act, 1996, yet such power has been recognized to exist with the arbitral tribunal by virtue of
the law expounded by Cox and Kings (I) (supra). It then held that such power to implead can be
traced to the arbitral tribunal’s power to determine its own jurisdiction under Section 16 of the Act,
1996, which includes the power to determine whether the arbitral tribunal has jurisdiction over
non-signatories to the arbitration agreement in question. Moreover, under the scheme of Act, 1996,
it is always open to the parties to challenge such impleadment by leading evidence on these issues
before the arbitrator and thereafter before the courts by taking recourse to Section 34 of the Act,
1996 after the award is passed. The relevant observations read as under: -
“43. I further find much substance in the argument of Mr. Sarda on behalf of the
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 that the Arbitral Tribunal is obliged to follow the law laid
down by the Supreme Court and/or judge made law. This would be the case despite
the Arbitral Tribunal not having specific power to consider an application for
impleadment and/or the power of the Civil Court under Order I Rule 10 of the CPC.
The Delhi High Court in Abhibus Services India Private Ltd. (Supra), paragraph 136
has the recognized concept of judge made law. However, it has been held that in the
absence of any trace of such power in the entire scheme of the Act, the power of
impleadment cannot be said to be conferred upon the Tribunal on the basis of judge
made law. This decision of the Delhi High Court was prior to the decision of the
Supreme Court in Cox and Kings (Supra) which in my view has changed the law with
regard to impleadment of non-signatories to the Arbitration Agreement on the ‘group
of companies’ doctrine and has left it to the Arbitral Tribunal to determine this issue.
xxx xxx xxx
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
34
45. The aforementioned findings are on the premise that the impugned Order is an
interim award. However, one cannot lose sight of the fact that the Arbitrator under
Section 16 of the Arbitration Act has the power to determine issues of jurisdiction
which in my view would include whether the Arbitrator has jurisdiction over
nonsignatories to an Arbitration Agreement. Any such decision taken by the
Arbitrator can always be the subject matter of a challenge by the Petitioners in a
Petition filed under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act after the final Award is passed.
Further, I do not find merit in the submission of Mr. Rustomojee that the aforesaid
points for determination namely, issue Nos.
(ii), (iii) and (v) which have been extracted above have been finally determined. It is always open for
the Petitioners to lead evidence on these issues and invite final adjudication by the learned Sole
Arbitrator on these issues. The decisions of the Delhi High Court in National Highway Authority of
India (Supra) and Goyal MG Gases Pvt. Ltd. (Supra) are apposite.” (Emphasis supplied)
26. Similarly, the Delhi High Court in Indraprastha Power Generation Co. Ltd. v. Hero Solar Energy
Pvt. Ltd. reported in (2024) SCC OnLine Del 6080 held that although Arupri Logistics (supra) when
it was rendered was correct in holding that an arbitral tribunal cannot join or delete parties, or
proceed on principles akin to Order I Rule 10 of the CPC, and that such power vests only with the
courts, yet after the decisions of this Court in Cox and Kings (I) (supra) and Cox and Kings (II)
(supra), it is crystal clear that arbitral tribunals do indeed have the power to implead a
non-signatory. It observed that since, Cox and Kings (II) (supra) has held that the question whether
a non-signatory is bound by the arbitration agreement or not should be left to the arbitral tribunals
to decide, the obvious corollary to the aforesaid would be that if the arbitral tribunal were to arrive
at a finding that such non-signatory is indeed bound by the arbitration agreement, it would
necessarily have to include (sic implead) such party to the arbitration proceedings. Accordingly, it
held that the arbitral tribunal would possess the jurisdiction to implead non-signatories who may be
bound by the outcome of the arbitral proceedings, if there exists some kind of connection or positive
act or conduct by the non-signatory that would indicate its connection to the contractual duties of
the signatories. The relevant observations read as under: -
“20. In Arupri Logistics, as Mr. Ghose correctly points out, a coordinate Bench of this
Court has clearly held that an Arbitral Tribunal cannot join or delete parties, or
proceed on principles akin to Order I Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908.
The power to join or delete parties in a proceeding, it is held, vests only in Court. As
such, it is only the Referral Court which, at the stage of referring the dispute to
arbitration, can join non- signatories to the arbitral proceedings. The Arbitral
Tribunal is bound to decide the issue inter se the parties who are before it and cannot
carry out any addition or deletion thereto.
21. Arupri Logistics thus, holds that an Arbitral Tribunal cannot add parties to the
proceedings before it, and that the jurisdiction to do so vests only in the referral
Court.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
35
22. After the decision was rendered by the Coordinate Bench in Arupri Logistics,
however, the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court has rendered its decision in
Cox and Kings-II on 6 December 2023, and the issue of whether an Arbitral Tribunal
can join parties may once again be debatable after the said decision. [...] xxx xxx xxx
24. These passages indicate that the Section 11 Court should leave, to the Arbitral
Tribunal, the decision as to whether a non-
signatory to the arbitration agreement should be bound by it. The corollary would obviously be that
if the Arbitral Tribunal were to find that a nonsignatory is bound by arbitration agreement, it would
necessarily have to include such non-signatory in the arbitration proceedings. Following Cox and
Kings-II, therefore, it may be possible to argue that an Arbitral Tribunal does possess the
jurisdiction to implead non-signatories who may be bound by the outcome of the arbitral
proceedings.
26. The impugned order of the Arbitral Tribunal has observed that, in the above passages from Cox
and Kings-I as endorsed in Cox and Kings-II, a non-signatory could be impleaded in arbitral
proceedings only if there is some kind of connection or positive act by the conduct of the
non-signatory subsequent to the execution of the contract, or participation by the non-signatory in
the negotiation, performance or termination of the contract indicating a connection in the
contractual duties of the parties. [ ]”
27. In yet another decision of the Delhi High Court in KKH Finvest Private Ltd. v. Jonas Haggard &
Ors. reported in (2024) SCC OnLine Del 7254 although the issue primarily entailed whether the
non-signatories therein could be regarded as a ‘veritable party’ to the arbitration agreement and
thus, be referred to arbitration or not, yet the observations therein could be said to be a trail blazer
on the issue of whether the arbitral tribunal has the power to implead a non-signatory or not. It
observed that as per the decision of this Court in Ajay Madhusudan Patel (supra), at the stage of
deciding an application under Section 11 of the Act, 1996, the referral courts are only required to
prima-facie determine if the non-signatories are a veritable party to the arbitration clause or not. It
held that as per Cox and Kings (I) (supra) the definition of “party” under Section 2(1)(h) of the Act,
1996 is inclusive of both signatories and non-signatories, provided that such non-signatory actively
participates in the performance of a contract, and its actions align with those of the other members
of the group. Furthermore, the court, taking note of the contradictory views expressed by two
coordinate benches in Arupri Logistics (supra) and Indraprastha Power Generation Co. Ltd. (supra),
observed that since the findings of a referral court is only limited to a bird’s eye view of whether a
non-signatory is a veritable party or not, the issue of whether such party can be impleaded and made
part of the arbitration proceedings or not ought to be decided by the arbitral tribunal based on the
pleadings and arguments. The relevant observations read as under: -
“75. Hence, at this stage, this Court being a referral court is only required to take a
prima facie view on whether there exists an arbitration agreement and whether the
respondents who are non- signatories to the MoS are veritable parties to the
arbitration agreement.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
36
xxx xxx xxx
78. In cases where impleadment of non-signatories to arbitration proceedings is
necessary, courts have delineated various approaches. It can be achieved via : a)
consent-based theories, which emphasize identifying the mutual intent of the parties
and include concepts like agency, implied consent, and the assignment or transfer of
contractual rights; and b) non-consensual theories, which are rooted in equity and
encompass doctrines such as alter ego/piercing the corporate veil, estoppel,
succession, and apparent authority [refer to Cox & Kings (supra), para 192]. At this
stage and as a referral court, as per Ajay Madhusudan Patel (supra), the test is
whether prima facie the respondents are veritable parties to the MoS containing the
arbitration clause.
This has been dealt with in detail in Issue I.
79. It is settled position of law that the definition of parties under the 1996 Act [as envisaged under
Section 2(1)(h)] is inclusive of both signatories and non-signatories. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Cox & Kings Ltd. v. SAP India (P) Ltd., (2024) 4 SCC 1 observed that if a nonsignatory party actively
participates in the performance of a contract, and its actions align with those of the other members
of the group, it gives the impression that the non- signatory is a “veritable” party to the contract
which contains the arbitration agreement. Based on this impression, the other party may reasonably
assume that the non-signatory is indeed a veritable party to the contract and bind it to the
arbitration agreement. [...]
80. Thus, the assessment required to be undertaken by this Court
- to give prima facie observations on whether the respondents are veritable parties or not - is
primarily an assessment regarding the conduct, role, and involvement of the non-signatory in the
underlying contract i.e. the MoS. At the outset, it is to be noted that the term “veritable parties”
applies to both persons and entities [refer to Cox & Kings (supra), para 96]. In order to assess the
same, this Court is required to consider factors such as mutual intent, relationship between the
signatories and non-signatories, commonality of subject matter, composite nature of transactions
and performance of the contract.
81. The intention of the parties to be bound by an arbitration agreement is to be gathered from the
circumstances surrounding the involvement of a non-signatory party in the negotiation,
performance, and termination of the underlying contract containing the agreement. If the
non-signatory's actions align with those of the signatories, it could reasonably lead the signatories to
believe that the non-signatory was a veritable party to the contract containing the arbitration clause.
To infer the non- signatory's consent, its participation/involvement in the negotiation or
performance of the contract must be positive, direct, and substantial, rather than merely incidental.
The burden of proof to establish the same lies on the party seeking to implead the non-signatories to
the arbitration proceedings, in this case, the petitioners.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
37
xxx xxx xxx
101. Two coordinate benches of this Court have taken contrary views on whether the arbitral
tribunal is vested with the power to implead parties in arbitration proceedings. While Arupri
Logistics (P) Ltd. v. Vilas Gupta, 2023 SCC OnLine Del 4297 holds that the arbitral tribunal lacks
the jurisdiction to implead, Indraprastha Power Generation Co. Ltd. v. Hero Solar Energy (P) Ltd.,
2024 SCC OnLine Del 6080 holds that following Cox and Kings (supra), such jurisdiction may be
conferred upon the arbitral tribunal. Since I have referred respondent Nos. 2 to 5 to arbitration, the
only issue that remains to be adjudicated is whether respondent Nos. 2 to 5 are, in fact, proper and
necessary parties. The same shall be decided by the arbitrator in accordance with law. The finding of
the referral court which takes a bird's eye view and does not go into minute details is only for the
purpose of referring the parties to arbitration. The respondents will be at liberty to agitate this issue
before the arbitrator, who shall take an independent view based on the pleadings and arguments of
the parties.” (Emphasis supplied)
28. What is discernible from the aforesaid is that despite the wide recognition of the doctrinal
principles of ‘group of companies’, ‘alter-ego’, agency, implied consent, assignment or transfer of
contractual rights, estoppel, ‘apparent authority’ etc. to law of arbitration, the High Courts
throughout the country remained averse to accepting the application of these principles by the
arbitral tribunals. Even after the decision of this Court in Chloro Controls (supra) allowing
non-signatories to an arbitration agreement to be referred and enjoined to arbitration on the basis
of their conduct, role, and involvement in the underlying contract, the High Courts consistently held
that such power to refer or implead a non-signatory was only available to the courts and not to the
arbitral tribunals. It is only after the decision of this Court in in Cox and Kings (I) (supra), that the
position of law as regards the power of an arbitral tribunal to implead a non-signatory underwent a
significant change, whereby many High Courts which had earlier refused to recognize such power of
the arbitral tribunal, came around to recognizing it.
b. Evolution of the law on referral or joinder of Non-Signatories to arbitration proceedings and the
Aversion to the power of Arbitral Tribunals to implead a Non-Signatory.
29. For a better exposition, it would be apposite to first understand the evolution of the law
pertaining to the referral or joinder of even non-signatories to an arbitration agreement as a party to
the arbitration proceedings. In other words, to better cull out the reasons for why there existed a
divergence of views among various High Courts and the general reluctance to recognise the arbitral
tribunal’s power — as opposed to that of a court — in impleading such non- signatories to
arbitration proceedings.
I. Decision of Chloro Controls and the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015.
30. It all started with the three-Judge Bench decision of this Court in Chloro Controls (supra) when
this Court was called upon to determine an arbitral reference in case of multi-party agreements
where performance of the ancillary agreements was substantially dependent upon effective
execution of the principal agreement. This Court held that in exceptional cases involving composite
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
38
transactions with multi-party agreements, a non-signatory could be subjected to arbitration by
virtue of the ‘group of companies’ doctrine, provided there was a clear intention of the parties to
bind both the signatory as well as non-signatory parties to the arbitration agreement. It observed
that although the scope of am arbitration agreement is limited to the parties who entered into it, yet
the doctrine of ‘group of companies’ has found favour albeit in a limited sense both under the
English Law which was the original genesis of the Act, 1996 and under the international commercial
arbitration landscape, particularly in the United States and French jurisdictions. The relevant
observations read as under: -
“71. Though the scope of an arbitration agreement is limited to the parties who
entered into it and those claiming under or through them, the courts under the
English law have, in certain cases, also applied the “group of companies doctrine”.
This doctrine has developed in the international context, whereby an arbitration
agreement entered into by a company, being one within a group of companies, can
bind its non-signatory affiliates or sister or parent concerns, if the circumstances
demonstrate that the mutual intention of all the parties was to bind both the
signatories and the non-signatory affiliates. This theory has been applied in a number
of arbitrations so as to justify a tribunal taking jurisdiction over a party who is not a
signatory to the contract containing the arbitration agreement. [Russell on
Arbitration (23rd Edn.)]
72. This evolves the principle that a non-signatory party could be subjected to
arbitration provided these transactions were with group of companies and there was
a clear intention of the parties to bind both, the signatory as well as the non-signatory
parties. In other words, “intention of the parties” is a very significant feature which
must be established before the scope of arbitration can be said to include the
signatory as well as the non-signatory parties.
73. A non-signatory or third party could be subjected to arbitration without their
prior consent, but this would only be in exceptional cases. The court will examine
these exceptions from the touchstone of direct relationship to the party signatory to
the arbitration agreement, direct commonality of the subject-matter and the
agreement between the parties being a composite transaction. The transaction should
be of a composite nature where performance of the mother agreement may not be
feasible without aid, execution and performance of the supplementary or ancillary
agreements, for achieving the common object and collectively having bearing on the
dispute. Besides all this, the court would have to examine whether a composite
reference of such parties would serve the ends of justice. Once this exercise is
completed and the court answers the same in the affirmative, the reference of even
non-signatory parties would fall within the exception afore-discussed.”
31. The aversion or misconception that loomed before the various High Courts as regards the
inhibition of an arbitral tribunal to resort to the principles of ‘group of companies’, ‘alter-ego’,
agency etc. or to put it more simply, to implead a non-signatory to the arbitration proceedings on its
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
39
own accord can be deftly traced to two pertinent observations that were made in Chloro Controls
(supra).
32. Apart from the aforesaid reasons of economic reality and judicial comity justifying the
recognition of ‘group of companies’ in the modern regime of the law of arbitration including that of
India, Chloro Controls (supra) further reinforced the genesis of recognizing this doctrine within the
scheme of Act, 1996 by tracing it to Section 45 of the Act, more particularly the expression “parties
or any person claiming through or under him” used therein. It held that the aforesaid language of
Section 45 reflects a legislative intent of enlarging the scope beyond “parties” who are signatories to
the arbitration agreement to include non-signatories. It observed that Section 8 of the Act, 1996
does not import the same expression; “parties or any person claiming through or under him” which
can be found in Section 45 and simpliciter uses the expression “parties” without any extension, even
though Section 8 is a contemporary counter-part of Section 45 for the purpose of domestic
arbitrations under Part I. This clearly indicates that the legislature consciously and deliberately
opted to incorporate the aforesaid expression to give the provision a wider import to encourage
arbitration and bring it in tune with the prevalent best international practices. Thus, this very
ostensible legislative intent cannot be ignored by the courts and must be given due weightage. The
relevant observations read as under: -
“69. We have already noticed that the language of Section 45 is at a substantial
variance to the language of Section 8 in this regard. In Section 45, the expression
“any person” clearly refers to the legislative intent of enlarging the scope of the words
beyond “the parties” who are signatory to the arbitration agreement. Of course, such
applicant should claim through or under the signatory party. Once this link is
established, then the court shall refer them to arbitration. The use of the word “shall”
would have to be given its proper meaning and cannot be equated with the word
“may”, as liberally understood in its common parlance. The expression “shall” in the
language of Section 45 is intended to require the court to necessarily make a
reference to arbitration, if the conditions of this provision are satisfied. To that
extent, we find merit in the submission that there is a greater obligation upon the
judicial authority to make such reference, than it was in comparison to the 1940 Act.
However, the right to reference cannot be construed strictly as an indefeasible right.
One can claim the reference only upon satisfaction of the prerequisites stated under
Sections 44 and 45 read with Schedule I of the 1996 Act. Thus, it is a legal right which
has its own contours and is not an absolute right, free of any obligations/limitations.
xxx xxx xxx
93. As noticed above, the legislative intent and essence of the 1996 Act was to bring
domestic as well as international commercial arbitration in consonance with the
Uncitral Model Rules, the New York Convention and the Geneva Convention. The
New York Convention was physically before the legislature and available for its
consideration when it enacted the 1996 Act. Article II of the Convention provides that
each contracting State shall recognise an agreement and submit to arbitration all or
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
40
any differences which have arisen or which may arise between them in respect of a
defined legal relationship, whether contractual or not concerning a subject-matter
capable of settlement by arbitration.
Once the agreement is there and the court is seized of an action in relation to such subject-matter,
then on the request of one of the parties, it would refer the parties to arbitration unless the
agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable of performance.
94. Still, the legislature opted to word Section 45 somewhat dissimilarly. Section 8 of the 1996 Act
also uses the expression “parties” simpliciter without any extension. In significant contradistinction,
Section 45 uses the expression “one of the parties or any person claiming through or under him” and
“refer the parties to arbitration”, whereas the rest of the language of Section 45 is similar to that of
Article II(3) of the New York Contention. The court cannot ignore this aspect and has to give due
weightage to the legislative intent. It is a settled rule of interpretation that every word used by the
legislature in a provision should be given its due meaning. To us, it appears that the legislature
intended to give a liberal meaning to this expression.
95. The language of Section 45 has wider import. It refers to the request of a party and then refers to
an Arbitral Tribunal, while under Section 8(3) it is upon the application of one of the parties that the
court may refer the parties to arbitration. There is some element of similarity in the language of
Section 8 and Section 45 read with Article II(3). The language and expressions used in Section 45,
“any person claiming through or under him” including in legal proceedings may seek reference of all
parties to arbitration. Once the words used by the legislature are of wider connotation or the very
language of the section is structured with liberal protection then such provision should normally be
construed liberally.
96. Examined from the point of view of the legislative object and the intent of the framers of the
statute i.e. the necessity to encourage arbitration, the court is required to exercise its jurisdiction in
a pending action, to hold the parties to the arbitration clause and not to permit them to avoid their
bargain of arbitration by bringing civil action involving multifarious causes of action, parties and
prayers.” (Emphasis supplied)
33. However, this rudimentary understanding of the expression “parties” and “parties or any person
claiming through or under him” in Section(s) 8 and 45 of the Act, 1996 respectively by Chloro
Controls (supra) for the import of the doctrine of ‘group of companies’ into the Act, 1996 was one of
the two-fold reasons that eventually convoluted the position of law as regards impleadment of
non-signatories, which we shall further discuss.
34. After having established the foundational basis of the doctrine of ‘group of companies’ in the Act,
1996, Chloro Controls (supra) then proceeded to explain the manner in which the aforesaid doctrine
is to be applied. Since any application under Section 45 of the Act, 1996 for appointment of an
arbitrator would be governed by Section 11 sub-section (6) of the Act, it as a natural corollary would
necessarily entail the adjudication and disposal of objections contemplated thereunder, more
particularly the validity or existence of the arbitration agreement, the application not satisfying the
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
41
ingredients of Section 11(6) of the 1996 Act and claims being barred by time, etc as mandated by
sub-section (7) of Section 11 of the Act. For the aforesaid proposition, reliance was placed on the
seven-Judge Bench decision of this Court in SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd. reported in (2005) 8 SCC
618 and the subsequent decision of Shree Ram Mills Ltd. v. Utility Premises (P) Ltd. reported in
(2007) 4 SCC 599 which held that the primarily it is for the courts to decide all preliminary issues at
the referral stage under Section 11(6) of the Act, and the principle of kompetenz-kompetenz
enshrined in Section 16 empowering the arbitral tribunal to rule on its own jurisdiction, applies only
when the parties go before the tribunal without having taken recourse to Section(s) 8 or 11
respectively of the Act, 1996 or where these issues are explicitly left open to the arbitral tribunal to
decide by the referral court. Accordingly, Chloro Controls (supra) held that Section 45 of the Act,
1996 which envisages the same test as Section(s) 8 and 11 of the Act, insofar as the preliminary
determination for making a reference to an arbitral tribunal is concerned, would as a natural
corollary to the ratio of SBP & Co. (supra) contemplate the determination of all fundamental issues
for making such reference by the courts, including the issue whether a non-signatory could be said
to be bound by the arbitration agreement. In the last, it further observed that even the legislative
intent behind Section 45 of the Act, 1996, without any ambiguity contemplates determination of
these issues in the very first instance by the judicial forum, evident from the absence of any
provision analogous to Section 16 of the Act, 1996 in Part II of the Act. The relevant observations
read as under: -
“118. An application for appointment of the Arbitral Tribunal under Section 45 of the
1996 Act would also be governed by the provisions of Section 11(6) of the Act. This
question is no more res integra and has been settled by decision of a Constitution
Bench of seven Judges of this Court in SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., wherein this
Court held that power exercised by the Chief Justice is not an administrative power.
It is a judicial power. It is a settled principle that the Chief Justice or his designate
Judge will decide preliminary aspects which would attain finality unless otherwise
directed to be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal.
119. [...]This aspect of the arbitration law was explained by a two-
Judge Bench of this Court in Shree Ram Mills Ltd. v. Utility Premises (P) Ltd. wherein, while
referring to the judgment in SBP & Co. particularly the above paragraph (para 39) of SBP case21,
this Court held that the scope of order under Section 11 of the 1996 Act would take in its ambit the
issue regarding territorial jurisdiction and the existence of the arbitration agreement. The Court
noticed that if these issues are not decided by the Chief Justice or his designate, there would be no
question of proceeding with the arbitration. [...] Thus, the Bench while explaining the judgment of
this Court in SBP & Co. has stated that the Chief Justice may not decide certain issues finally and
upon recording satisfaction that prima facie the issue has not become dead even leave it for the
Arbitral Tribunal to decide.
xxx xxx xxx
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
42
121. [...] The expressions “Chief Justice does not in strict sense decide the issue” or “is prima facie
satisfied”, will have to be construed in the facts and circumstances of a given case. Where the Chief
Justice or his designate actually decides the issue, then it can no longer be prima facie, but would be
a decision binding in law. On such an issue, the Arbitral Tribunal will have no jurisdiction to
redetermine the issue. In Shree Ram Mills, the Court held that the Chief Justice could record a
finding where the issue between the parties was still alive or was dead by lapse of time. Where it
prima facie found the issue to be alive, the Court could leave the question of limitation and also open
to be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal.
122. The above expressions are mere observations of the Court and do not fit into the contours of the
principle of ratio decidendi of the judgment. The issues in regard to validity or existence of the
arbitration agreement, the application not satisfying the ingredients of Section 11(6) of the 1996 Act
and claims being barred by time, etc. are the matters which can be adjudicated by the Chief Justice
or his designate. Once the parties are heard on such issues and the matter is determined in
accordance with law, then such a finding can only be disturbed by the court of competent
jurisdiction and cannot be reopened before the Arbitral Tribunal.
     [...]
                        xxx          xxx           xxx
128. [ ] However, as already noticed, the Court clearly took the view that the findings returned by the
Chief Justice while exercising his judicial powers under Section 11 relatable to Section 8 are final
and not open to be questioned by the Arbitral Tribunal. Sections 8 and 45 of the 1996 Act are
provisions independent of each other. But for the purposes of reference to arbitration, in both cases,
the applicant has to pray for a reference before the Chief Justice or his designate in terms of Section
11 of the 1996 Act. [...] We are conscious of the fact that the above dictum of the Court in SBP case is
in relation to the scope and application of Section 11 of the 1996 Act. It has been held in various
judgments of this Court but more particularly in SBP which is binding on us that before making a
reference, the Court has to dispose of the objections as contemplated under Section 8 or Section 45,
as the case may be, and wherever needed upon filing of affidavits. Thus, to an extent, the law laid
down by this Court on Section 11 shall be attracted to an international arbitration which takes place
in India as well as domestic arbitration. This, of course, would be applicable at pre-award stage.
Thus, there exists a direct legal link, limited to that extent.
xxx xxx xxx
130. [ ] The more important aspect as far as Chapter I of Part II of the 1996 Act is concerned, is the
absence of any provision like Section 16 appearing in Part I of the same Act. Section 16 contemplates
that the arbitrator may determine its own jurisdiction. Absence of such a provision in Part II
Chapter I is suggestive of the requirement for the court to determine the ingredients of Section 45,
at the threshold itself. It is expected of the court to answer the question of validity of the arbitration
agreement, if a plea is raised that the agreement containing the arbitration clause or the arbitration
clause itself is null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed. Such determination by the
court in accordance with law would certainly attain finality and would not be open to question by
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
43
the Arbitral Tribunal, even as per the principle of prudence. It will prevent multiplicity to litigation
and reagitating of same issues over and over again. The underlining (sic underlying) principle of
finality in Section 11(7) would be applicable with equal force while dealing with the interpretation of
Sections 8 and 45. Further, it may be noted that even the judgment of this Court in SBP & Co. takes
a view in favour of finality of determination by the Court despite the language of Section 16 in Part I
of the 1996 Act. Thus, there could hardly be any possibility for the Court to take any other view in
relation to an application under Section 45 of the 1996 Act. Since, the categorisation referred to by
this Court in National Insurance Co. Ltd. is founded on the decision by the larger Bench of the Court
in SBP & Co., we see no reason to express any different view. The categorisation falling under para
22.1 of National Insurance Co. case would certainly be answered by the Court before it makes a
reference while under para 22.2 of that case, the Court may exercise its discretion and decide the
dispute itself or refer the dispute to the Arbitral Tribunal. Still, under the cases falling under para
22.3, the Court is expected to leave the determination of such dispute upon the Arbitral Tribunal
itself. But wherever the Court decides in terms of categories mentioned in paras 22.1 and 22.2, the
decision of the Court is unreviewable by the Arbitral Tribunal.
xxx xxx xxx
131. 2. The issue of jurisdiction normally is a mixed question of law and facts. Occasionally, it may
also be a question of law alone. It will be appropriate to decide such questions at the beginning of
the proceedings itself and they should have finality.
xxx xxx xxx 131.4. Applying the analogy thereof will fortify the view that determination of
fundamental issues as contemplated under Section 45 of the 1996 Act at the very first instance by
the judicial forum is not only appropriate but is also the legislative intent. Even the language of
Section 45 of the 1996 Act suggests that unless the court finds that an agreement is null and void,
inoperative and incapable of being performed, it shall refer the parties to arbitration.
(Emphasis supplied)
35. This rudimentary understanding and legislative position of the extent of judicial scrutiny and
determination at the referral stage in terms of Section 11 of the Act, 1996, could be said to be the
second reason why arbitral tribunals were not found to be empowered to identify and implead a
non-signatory to the arbitration agreement.
36. In the aftermath of Chloro Controls (supra), the Law Commission of India in its 246th Report
observed that a party to an arbitration agreement does not necessarily mean only the signatory to
such agreement, and that internationally it has been widely accepted that even non-signatories may
be parties to the arbitration agreement. It further took note of the decision of Chloro Controls
(supra), more particularly how this Court has recognized this concept in the phrase “claiming
through or under” in Section 45 of the Act, 1996. However, noticing the absence of the same
expression in the corresponding provision of Section 8 and other relevant provisions where the
context requires recognition of non-signatories, the Law Commission suggested that Section 2(1)(h)
of the Act, 1996 which defines “party” be amended and the phrase “person claiming through or
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
44
under such party” be inserted to cure this anomaly. The relevant observations read as under: -
“62. However, a party does not necessarily mean only the “signatory” to the
arbitration agreement. In appropriate contexts, a “party” means not just a signatory,
but also persons “claiming through or under” such signatory – for instance,
successors-of- interest of such parties, alter-ego’s of such parties etc. This is
particularly true in the case of unincorporated entities, where the issue of
“personality” is usually a difficult legal question and raises a host of other issues. This
principle is recognized by the New York Convention, 1985 which in article II (1)
recognizes an agreement between parties “in respect of a defined legal relationship,
whether contractual or not.”
63. The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 under section 7 borrows the definition
of the “arbitration agreement” from the corresponding provision at article 7 of the
UNCITRAL Model Law which in turn borrows this from article II of the New York
Convention. However, the definition of the word “party” in section 2(1)(h) refers to a
“party” to mean “a party to an arbitration agreement.” This cannot be read
restrictively to imply a mere “signatory” to an arbitration agreement, since there are
many situations and contexts where even a “non-signatory” can be said to be a
“party” to an arbitration agreement. This was recognized by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in Chloro Controls v.
Severn Trent Water Purification, (2013) 1 SCC 641, where the Hon’ble Supreme Court was dealing
with the scope and interpretation of section 45 of the Act and, in that context, discussed the scope of
the relevant doctrines on the basis of which “non-signatories” could be said to be bound by the
arbitration agreement, including in cases of inter-related contracts, group of companies doctrine etc.
64. This interpretation given by the Hon’ble Supreme Court follows from the wording of section 45
of the Act which recognizes the right of a “person claiming through or under [a party]” to apply to a
judicial authority to refer the parties to arbitration. The same language is also to be found in section
54 of the Act. This language is however, absent in the corresponding provision of section 8 of the
Act. It is similarly absent in the other relevant provisions, where the context would demand that a
party includes also a “person claiming through or under such party”. To cure this anomaly, the
Commission proposes an amendment to the definition of “party” under section 2 (h) of the Act.”
(Emphasis supplied)
37. Based on the suggestions made by the Law Commission, the legislature promptly introduced the
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 whereby inter-alia although Section 8
sub-section (1) of the Act, 1996 was amended and the phrase “a party to an arbitration agreement or
any person claiming through or under him” was inserted yet for reasons unknown, the suggestion
for amending Section 2(1)(h) of the Act by the Law Commission did not see the light of day.
38. At this juncture it would be apposite to briefly explain the object of Section(s) 8 and 45 of the
Act, 1996 respectively and the nature of the said provisions. Section(s) 8 and 45 of the Act, 1996
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
45
empowers the parties who have approached the courts with a subject-matter which is covered by an
arbitration agreement to refer such dispute to an arbitral tribunal, with the only difference between
the two being that the former pertains to domestic arbitrations whereas the latter deals with
international arbitrations in terms of the New York Convention. In essence, it entitles any party that
is before a court or judicial forum to seek a reference to arbitration subject to the conditions laid
down in the subsequent sub-sections. As held in Hema Khattar v. Shiv Khera reported in (2017) 7
SCC 716, Section(s) 8 and 45 of the Act, 1996 are peremptory in nature that obligates the courts to
refer the parties to arbitration where there is an arbitration agreement.
39. Since Chloro Controls (supra) recognized the applicability of the principles of ‘group of
companies’, (sic) ‘alter-ego’, agency etc. for enjoining a non- signatory to the arbitration proceedings
only from an interpretation of the phrase “a party to an arbitration agreement or any person
claiming through or under him” which by virtue of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment)
Act, 2015, found place only in Section(s) 8 and 45 of the Act, 1996, which as discussed above deals
with only the power of the courts or judicial authorities to make a reference to arbitration, and no
such phrase was inserted in the substantive definition of “party” in Section 2(1)(h), the net effect of
the decision of Chloro Controls (supra) and the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act,
2015 was that only the courts by virtue of Section(s) 8 and 45 of the Act, 1996 were empowered to
implead a non- signatory to the arbitration proceedings, and not the arbitral tribunals. The omission
of amending Section 2(1)(h) of the Act, 1996 further fortified the notion that the exercise of
authority and power by the arbitral tribunal would continue to be confined to the ordinary
substantive definition of “party” under the said provision and not by the enlarged understanding of
the term “party … or any person claiming through or under him” as used for the courts under
Section(s) 8 and 45 of the Act, 1996, except where an arbitral tribunal has been constituted
specifically by the courts. This along with the standard of scrutiny that was expected by the referral
courts under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 in terms of SBP & Co. (supra) meant that, unless a
non-signatory is referred to arbitration by a court after a thorough application of mind and after a
final determination by such referral courts as to whether the non-signatory is said to bound by the
arbitration agreement or not, no non-signatory can be subjected to arbitration.
40. Thus, due to the aforesaid, a misconception plagued the position of law that an arbitral tribunal
does not have the authority or power to implead a non- signatory to the arbitration proceedings, and
that only the courts are empowered to do so. It was largely in this backdrop that the decisions of Oil
and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. (supra), Balmer Lawrie & Co. Ltd. (supra), Sudhir Gopi (supra),
V.G. Santhosam (supra) and other decisions of various different High Courts came to be rendered.
II. Decision of Cox and Kings (I) and the Judicial Rectification of the first misconception by Chloro
Controls.
41. In Cox and Kings (I) (supra) a five-Judge Bench of this Court wherein one of us (J.B. Pardiwala
J.) was part of the Bench were called upon to determine the validity and applicability of the ‘Group
of Companies’ doctrine in the jurisprudence of Indian arbitration. This Court after an extensive
examination of the international practices and the scheme of Act, 1996 held that the ‘Group of
Companies’ doctrine was invariably a part of the larger arbitration framework that has been
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
46
developing across the world and was in tune with the avowed object of the Act, 1996 which aims to
make the Indian arbitration law more responsive to the contemporary requirements. The relevant
observations read as under: -
“128. [...] This approach ensures that a dogmatic emphasis on express consent is
eschewed in favour of a modern approach to consent which focuses on the factual
analysis, complexity of commercial projects, and thereby increases the relevance of
arbitration in multi-party disputes. Moreover, it is also keeping in line with the
objectives of the Arbitration Act which aims to make the Indian arbitration law more
responsive to the contemporary requirements.
148. [...] The group of companies doctrine has important utility in determining the
mutual intention of the parties in the context of complex transactions involving
multiple parties and multiple agreements. Moreover, the doctrine has been
substantively entrenched in the Indian arbitration jurisprudence. We are aware of the
fact that the group of companies doctrine has not found favor in some other
jurisdictions, including in English law.
However, we deem it appropriate to retain the doctrine which has held the field in Indian
jurisprudence though by firmly establishing it within the realm of the mutual consent or the mutual
intent of the parties to a commercial bargain. This will ensure on the one hand that Indian
arbitration law retains a sense of dynamism so as to respond to contemporary challenges. At the
same time, structuring the doctrine in the manner suggested so as to ground it in settled principles
governing the elucidation of mutual intent is necessary. This will ensure that the doctrine has a
jurisprudential foundation in party autonomy and consent to arbitrate.”
42. Cox and Kings (I) (supra) further held that the approach adopted by Chloro Controls (supra), so
far as infusing or reading the doctrine of ‘Group of Companies’ into the expression “a party to an
arbitration agreement or any person claiming through or under him” is concerned, was incorrect. It
held that the words “any person” in Section 45 of the Act, 1996 by itself does not connote a wider
import to the term “party”. The aforesaid phrase cannot be singled out and construed devoid of the
context provided in the subsequent phrase “claiming through or under”. It held that the entire
expression only refers and includes persons / parties acting in a derivative capacity such as in the
instances of successors in interest or assignees of any such interest that have been devolved upon
them by the original signatories / parties. The import of the expression “a party to an arbitration
agreement or any person claiming through or under him” only refers to that persons which it is
deriving its claim or right by virtue of it standing in the shoes of the original signatory party. The
expression “claiming through or under” can only bind those third parties who irrespective of being a
non-signatory to the arbitration agreement are nevertheless bound by it, by virtue of them
substituting the signatory party in their derivative capacity. However, the ‘Group of Companies’
doctrine functions on a completely different tangent whereby, a non-signatory is held bound by the
arbitration agreement in its own individual capacity AND in addition to the signatories on the basis
of mutual consent, regardless of whether they may have derived any rights or benefits from the
signatories and independent of the identity of the signatories. It observed that since consent forms
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
47
the cornerstone of arbitration, merely because any party shares certain interests or benefits from a
contract, they would not be covered under the expression “claiming through or under” just because
they happen to share a legal or commercial relationship. Thus, Chloro Controls (supra) to the extent
that it traced the group of companies doctrine to the phrase “claiming through or under” was held to
be erroneous and against the well-established principles of contract and commercial law. The
relevant observations read as under: -
“137. The word “claim” is of very extensive significance embracing every species of
legal demand. In the ordinary sense, it means to demand as one’s own or as one’s
right.114 A “claim” also means assertion of a cause of action.115 The expression
“through” connotes “by means of, in consequence of, by reason of.”116 The term
“under” is used with reference to an inferior or subordinate position. P Ramanatha
Aiyar’s Law Lexicon defines “claiming under” or “claiming under him” to denote a
person putting forward a claim under derived rights.117 When the above definitions
are read harmoniously, it gives rise to an inference that a person “claiming through or
under” is asserting their legal demand or cause of action in an intermediate or
derivative capacity. We can also conclude that a person “claiming through or under”
has inferior or subordinate rights in comparison to the party from which it is deriving
its claim or right. Therefore, a person “claiming through or under” cannot be a
“party” to an arbitration agreement on its own terms because it only stands in the
shoes of the original signatory party.
144. The first proposition of law relies on the construction of the expression “any
person” to conclude that the language of Section 45 has wider import. However, the
expression “any person” cannot be singled out and construed devoid of its context.
The context, in terms of Section 8 and 45, is provided by the subsequent phrase –
“claiming through or under”. Therefore, such “any persons” are acting only in a
derivative capacity. Since an arbitration agreement excludes the jurisdiction of
national courts, it is essential that the parties consent, either expressly or impliedly,
to submit their dispute to the arbitral tribunal.
145. The second and third proposition of law states that a non-
signatory party may claim through or under a signatory party by virtue of its legal or commercial
relationship with the latter. However, this proposition is contrary to the common law position as
evidenced in Sancheti (supra) and Tanning Research Laboratories (supra) according to which a
mere legal or commercial connection is not sufficient to allow a non-signatory to claim through or
under a party to the arbitration agreement. [...] Therefore, even though a subsidiary derives
interests or benefits from a contract entered into by the company within a group, they would not be
covered under the expression “claiming through or under” merely on the basis that it shares a legal
or commercial relationship with the parties.
146. [...] The group of companies doctrine is founded on the mutual intention of the parties to
determine if the non-signatory entity within a group could be made a party to the arbitration
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
48
agreement in its own right. Such non-signatory entity is not “claiming through or under” a signatory
party. As mentioned above, the phrase “claiming through or under” is used in the context of
successors in interest that act in a derivative capacity and substitute the signatory party to the
arbitration agreement. To the contrary, the group of companies doctrine is used to bind the
non-signatory to the arbitration agreement so that it can agitate the benefits and be subject to the
burdens that it derived or is conferred in the course of the performance of the contract. The doctrine
can be used to bind a non-signatory party to the arbitration agreement regardless of the phrase
“claiming through or under” as appearing in Sections 8 and 45 of the Arbitration Act.
147. In Chloro Controls (supra), this Court joined the non- signatory entities as parties to the
arbitration agreement in their own rights on the basis that they were signatories to ancillary
agreements which were closely interlinked with the performance of the principal agreement
containing the arbitration agreement. This Court in Chloro Controls (supra) reasoned that the non
signatory entities, being part of the same corporate group as the signatory parties, were subsidiaries
in interest or subsidiary companies, and therefore were “claiming through or under” the signatory
parties. As held above, the phrase “claiming through or under” only applies to entities acting in a
derivative capacity and not with respect to joinder of parties in their own right. Therefore, we hold
that the approach of this Court in Chloro Controls (supra) to the extent that it traced the group of
companies doctrine to the phrase “claiming through or under” is erroneous and against the
well-established principles of contract and commercial law. As observed above, the existence of the
group of companies doctrine is intrinsically found on the principle of the mutual intent of parties to
a commercial bargain.” (Emphasis supplied)
43. Cox and Kings (I) (supra) observed that the correct legal basis for the application of the doctrine
of ‘group of companies’ (sic and other allied principles of mutual consent) can be found in the Act,
1996 from a conjoint reading of the provisions of Section(s) 2(1)(h) and 7, respectively. The
aforesaid may be understood as under: -
(i) First, it observed that Section 7 of the Act, 1996 which defines an “Arbitration
Agreement” lays down in sub-section (4) the various circumstances where a legal
relationship is said to exist of such nature as if there is an agreement in writing for
arbitration. Section 7 more particularly sub-section (4)(b) provides the circumstances
where the existence of an arbitration agreement can be inferred from various
documents that indicate a manifestation of consent of persons or entities through
their actions of exchanging documents, even if there is no formal agreement executed
between such persons in the conventional sense. Similarly, Section 7 sub-section
(4)(c) which provides that if there is an assertion of the existence of an arbitration
agreement by one party which was never denied or disputed by the other, then such
agreement would be considered a valid arbitration agreement, is one another
provision that lays down the circumstances when the existence of an arbitration
agreement may be assumed based on the conduct of a person or entity. The relevant
observations read as under: -
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
49
“70. Section 2(h) of the Arbitration Act defines a “party” to mean a party to an
arbitration agreement. Section 7 defines an arbitration agreement to mean an
agreement by the parties to submit to arbitration all or certain disputes which have
arisen or which may arise between them in respect of a “defined legal relationship.”
Section 7 requires that an arbitration agreement has to be in writing. Section 7
indicates the circumstances in which it is regarded as an agreement in writing. Such
an agreement may be embodied in a document, an exchange of communications,
including in the electronic form, or in a statement of claim which is not traversed in
the defence. In Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading Corporation, this Court observed that a
legal relationship means a relationship which gives rise to legal obligations and
duties, and confers a right. Such a right may be contractual or non-contractual. In
case of a non-
contractual legal relationship, the cause of action arises in tort, restitution, breach of statutory duty,
or some other non-contractual cause of action. Thus, the legislative intent underlying Section 7
suggests that any legal relationship, including relationships where there is no contract between the
persons or entities, but whose actions or conduct has given rise to a relationship, could form a
subject matter of an arbitration agreement under Section 7. [...]
72. Section 7(4)(b) provides the second circumstance, according to which an arbitration agreement
is in writing if it is contained in an exchange of letters, telex, telegrams or other means of
telecommunication including communication through electronic means which provide a record of
the agreement. According to this provision, the existence of an arbitration agreement can be
inferred from various documents duly approved by the parties.60 Section 7(4)(b) dispenses with the
conventional sense of an agreement as a document with signatories. Rather, it emphasizes on the
manifestation of the consent of persons or entities through their actions of exchanging documents.
However, the important aspect of the said provision lies in the fact that the parties should be able to
record their agreement through a documentary record of evidence. In Great Offshore Ltd. v. Iranian
Offshore Engineering and Construction Company, this Court observed that Section 7(4)(b) requires
the court to ask whether a record of agreement is found in the exchange of letters, telex, telegrams,
or other means of telecommunication.61 Thus, the act of agreeing by the persons or entities has to
be inferred or derived by the courts or tribunals from the relevant documents and communication,
neither of which can be equated with a conventional contract.
73. The third circumstance is provided under Section 7(4)(c), according to which an arbitration
agreement is in writing if it is contained in an exchange of statements of claim and defence in which
the existence of the agreement is alleged by one party and not denied by the other. A two- Judge
Bench of this Court clarified in S N Prasad v. Monnet Finance Limited62 that there will be an
“exchange of statements of claim and defence” for the purposes of Section 7(4)(c) if there is an
assertion of the existence of an arbitration agreement in any suit, petition or application filed before
any court or tribunal, and if there is no denial of it in the defence, counter, or written statement.
Thus, in the third circumstance the court proceeds on the assumption that the conduct of the person
or entity in not denying the existence of an arbitration agreement leads to the conclusive proof of its
existence. [...]”
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
50
(ii) Secondly, it found that Section 7 of the Act, 1996 is unique in nature inasmuch as it has two
distinct features; (I) that sub-section (1) provides that for there to be a valid arbitration agreement,
there must exists a defined legal relationship to arbitration, and (II) that sub-section (4) goes one
step beyond the traditional understanding of legal relationship, by laying down circumstances where
mutual intention of creating such legal relationship to arbitrate may be assumed or gathered from
the conduct of the parties. The relevant observations read as under: -
“73. [...] All the three circumstances contained in Section 7(4) are geared towards
determining the mutual intention of the parties to be bound by the arbitration
agreement.
74. Section 7 of the Arbitration Act contains two aspects: a substantive aspect and a formal aspect.
The substantive aspect is contained is Section 7(1) which allows parties to submit disputes arising
between them in respect of a defined legal relationship to arbitration. The legal relationships
between and among parties could either be contractual or non-contractual. For legal relations to be
contractual in nature, they ought to meet the requirements of the Indian contract law as contained
in the Contract Act. It has been shown in the preceding paragraphs that a contract can either be
express or implied, which is inferred on the basis of action or conduct of the parties. Thus, it is not
necessary for the persons or entities to be signatories to a contract to enter into a legal relationship –
the only important aspect to be determined is whether they intended or consented to enter into the
legal relationship by the dint of their action or conduct.”
(iii) Thirdly, it observed that Section 7 sub-section (3) of the Act, 1996 stipulates that where there is
a record of agreement to arbitrate, then there would be no requirement for having a written
arbitration agreement. Furthermore, Section 2(h) read with Section 7 of the Act, 1996 also places no
requirement that the “party” to an arbitration agreement must be a signatory to such agreement.
The natural corollary to the aforesaid would be that an arbitration agreement may be entered into in
any form, for example orally or tacitly, as long as the content of the agreement is recorded. It
eliminates the requirement of the signature of parties or an exchange of messages between the
parties. Thus what emanates is that even non-signatories can be regarded as a “party” to an
arbitration agreement. The relevant observations read as under: -
“75. The second aspect is contained in Section 7(3) which stipulates the requirement
of a written arbitration agreement. A written arbitration agreement need not be
signed by the parties if there is a record of agreement.63 The mandatory requirement
of a written arbitration agreement is merely to ensure that there is a clearly
established record of the consent of the parties to refer their disputes to arbitration to
the exclusion of the domestic courts.
76. Section 2(h) read with Section 7 does not expressly require the “party” to be a
signatory to an arbitration agreement or the underlying contract containing the
arbitration agreement. [...] The above provision states that an arbitration agreement
may be entered into in any form, for example orally or tacitly, as long as the content
of the agreement is recorded. It eliminates the requirement of the signature of parties
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
51
or an exchange of messages between the parties.”
44. Accordingly, Cox and Kings (I) (supra) made a significant shift from the original
understanding and legal basis of the doctrine of ‘group of companies’ and other allied
principles of determining mutual consent in Chloro Controls (supra). It held that the
legal basis for the application of the ‘Group of Companies’ doctrine lies in the very
definitions of “party” and “arbitration agreement” under Section(s) 2(1)(h) and
Section 7, respectively, and not in the expression “claiming through or under” in
Section(s) 8 and 45 of the Act, 1996. The relevant observations read as under: -
“78. Reading Section 7 of the Arbitration Act in view of the above discussion gives rise
to the following conclusions: first, arbitration agreements arise out of a legal
relationship between or among persons or entities which may be contractual or
otherwise; second, in situations where the legal relationship is contractual in nature,
the nature of relationship can be determined on the basis of general contract law
principles; third, it is not necessary for the persons or entities to be signatories to the
arbitration agreement to be bound by it; fourth, in case of non- signatory parties, the
important determination for the courts is whether the persons or entities intended or
consented to be bound by the arbitration agreement or the underlying contract
containing the arbitration agreement through their acts or conduct; fifth, the
requirement of a written arbitration agreement has to be adhered to strictly, but the
form in which such agreement is recorded is irrelevant; sixth, the requirement of a
written arbitration agreement does not exclude the possibility of binding non
signatory parties if there is a defined legal relationship between the signatory and
non-signatory parties; and seventh, once the validity of an arbitration agreement is
established, the court or tribunal can determine the issue of which parties are bound
by such agreement.
79. It is presumed that the formal signatories to an arbitration agreement are parties
who will be bound by it. However, in exceptional cases persons or entities who have
not signed or formally assented to a written arbitration agreement or the underlying
contract containing the arbitration agreement may be held to be bound by such
agreement. As mentioned in the preceding paragraphs, the doctrine of privity limits
the imposition of rights and liabilities on third parties to a contract. Generally, only
the parties to an arbitration agreement can be subject to the full effects of the
agreement in terms of the reliefs and remedies because they consented to be bound
by the arbitration agreement.
Therefore, the decisive question before the courts or tribunals is whether a non-signatory consented
to be bound by the arbitration agreement. To determine whether a non-signatory is bound by an
arbitration agreement, the courts and tribunals apply typical principles of contract law and
corporate law. The legal doctrines provide a framework for evaluating the specific contractual
language and the factual settings to determine the intentions of the parties to be bound by the
arbitration agreement.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
52
xxx xxx xxx
153. The group of companies doctrine is based on determining the mutual intention to join the
non-signatory as a “veritable” party to the arbitration agreement. Once a tribunal comes to the
determination that a non-signatory is a party to the arbitration agreement, such non-signatory party
can apply for interim measures under Section 9 of the Arbitration Act. Establishing the legal basis
for the application of the group of companies doctrine in the definition of “party” under Section
2(1)(h) read with Section 7 of the Arbitration Act resolves the anomality pointed out by Chief Justice
Ramana.”
45. The net effect of the aforesaid is that at the time when the decision of Chloro Controls (supra)
occupied the field, the applicability of various principles of determining mutual consent was
confined only to Section(s) 8 and 45 of the Act, 1996, which empowered only the courts to make a
reference to arbitration. In the same manner, since the definition of “party” in Section 2(1)(h) of the
Act, 1996 was understood to be at significant variance from Section(s) 8 and 45 of the Act, 1996,
more particularly the expression “any person claiming through or under” with the former being
construed to be much narrow in scope and include only the signatories to the arbitration agreement,
there was misconceived assumption, that the authority and jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal was
only limited to this narrowly misconstrued definition of “party”, unlike that of the courts who had
been endowed with the power and jurisdictional reach to even non-signatories by virtue of the
enlarged meaning of “party”, couched in the very language of Section(s) 8 and 45 of the Act, 1996.
Thus, it was assumed and rather wrongly, that an arbitral tribunal does not itself have the power to
lift the corporate veil or apply the doctrine of ‘Group of Companies’ and by extension to implead a
non-signatory to partake in arbitration by taking recourse to these principles of implied mutual
consent.
46. However, as discussed, the decision of Cox and Kings (I) (supra) has made it abundantly clear
that the legal basis for the application of the ‘Group of Companies’ doctrine or any other principle
for determining mutual consent is in the definition of “party” under Section 2(1)(h) read with the
meaning of “arbitration agreement” under Section 7 of the Act, 1996. Since both the aforesaid
provisions are not confined in their scope to either the courts or the arbitral tribunal, and rather
exists ubiquitously on the statute book and is common or indifferent to both the courts and arbitral
tribunals, there cannot be any gainsaying that even the arbitral tribunal now after the decision of
Cox and Kings (I) (supra) could be said to be clothed with the power to take recourse to the various
principles for determining mutual consent, and thereby implead a non-signatory to the arbitration,
if such person is found to be bound to the arbitration agreement.
III. Decision of Krish Spinning and the Judicial Rectification of the second misconception
emanating from SBP & Co.
47. As discussed in the foregoing paragraphs, the second reason why the various High Courts were
hesitant from recognizing the arbitral tribunal’s power to implead a non-signatory on its own
accord, stemmed from the understanding and position of law that existed then as regards the scope
and extent of judicial scrutiny of the courts which was required at the referral stage under Section 11
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
53
of the Act, 1996, before the subject matter could be referred to arbitration and an arbitral tribunal be
constituted.
48. In Konkan Railway Corpn. Ltd. v. Rani Construction (P) Ltd. reported in (2002) 2 SCC 388, a
five-Judge Bench of this Court observed that the power exercised by the referral court under Section
11 of the Act, 1996 is an administrative power and thus the Chief Justice or his designate do not have
to decide any preliminary issue at that stage. Any issue pertaining to non- arbitrability, validity and
existence of the arbitration agreement ought to be decided by the arbitrator.
49. The aforesaid view occupied the field till the seven-Judge Bench decision of this Court in SBP &
Co. (supra) which held that the power conferred upon the Chief Justice or his designate under
Section 11 of the Act, 1996 is a judicial power and not merely an administrative power. It held that
being a judicial power, the Chief Justice or his designate had the right to decide all preliminary
issues at the referral stage under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996, and that the power of the arbitral
tribunal to rule on its own jurisdiction under Section 16 would come into the picture only when the
parties go before the arbitral tribunal without recourse to the courts either under Sections 8 or 11
respectively of the Act, 1996.
50. The ultimate effect of the ratio of SBP & Co. (supra) was that the scope for interference available
to the referral courts when acting under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 was substantially expanded, and
the referral courts were not only empowered but also expected to conduct mini trials and indulge in
the appreciation of evidence on various issues concerned with the subject matter of arbitration.
51. Overtime, the decision of SBP & Co. (supra) insofar as the extent of judicial scrutiny that was
required under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 was concerned, proved to be counter serving as the
enlarged scope of judicial interference at the referral stage induced significant delays in the process
of appointment of arbitrators and constitution of arbitral tribunals, thereby rendering the very
framework of arbitration in India, ineffective, unviable and cumbersome.
52. The Law Commission of India in its 246th Report taking note of the aforesaid problem inter-alia
suggested that the scope of interference under Section(s) 8 and 11 respectively of the Act, 1996
should be restricted to a prima-facie satisfaction of the existence and validity of the arbitration
agreement. It further opined that except in cases where the court finds that no arbitration
agreement exists or is null and void, the ordinary approach of the courts under Section 11 of the Act,
1996 should be to appoint an arbitrator and refer the parties to arbitration, leaving all issues
including those which it has prima-facie determined for final adjudication by the arbitral tribunals.
The relevant observations read as under: -
“33. It is in this context, the Commission has recommended amendments to sections
8 and 11 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. The scope of the judicial
intervention is only restricted to situations where the Court/Judicial Authority finds
that the arbitration agreement does not exist or is null and void. In so far as the
nature of intervention is concerned, it is recommended that in the event the
Court/Judicial Authority is prima facie satisfied against the argument challenging the
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
54
arbitration agreement, it shall appoint the arbitrator and/or refer the parties to
arbitration, as the case may be. The amendment envisages that the judicial authority
shall not refer the parties to arbitration only if it finds that there does not exist an
arbitration agreement or that it is null and void. If the judicial authority is of the
opinion that prima facie the arbitration agreement exists, then it shall refer the
dispute to arbitration, and leave the existence of the arbitration agreement to be
finally determined by the arbitral tribunal. However, if the judicial authority
concludes that the agreement does not exist, then the conclusion will be final and not
prima facie. [...]”
53. The aforesaid recommendations of the Commission were taken note of by the Parliament and
accordingly Section 11 sub-section (6A) came to be inserted in the Act, 1996 by way of the
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015. As per the said provision, the referral courts
in exercise of their jurisdiction under Section 11 were now required to only look into one aspect —
the existence of an arbitration agreement — nothing more, nothing less. All other issues were now to
be invariably left for the final determination by the arbitral tribunal. [See: Duro Felguera, S.A. v.
Gangavaram Port Ltd. reported in (2017) 9 SCC 729]
54. A two-Judge Bench of this Court in Uttarakhand Purv Sainik Kalyan Nigam Ltd. v. Northern
Coal Field Ltd. reported in (2020) 2 SCC 455 held that the issue of limitation being a mixed question
of law and fact should be best left to the tribunal to decide and that the referral court should restrict
its examination only to the existence of an arbitration agreement between the parties.
55. Then came the decision of this Court in Vidya Drolia & Ors v. Durga Trading Corporation
reported in (2021) 2 SCC 1, which inter-alia held that although Section(s) 8 and 11 of the Act, 1996
are at some variance inasmuch as the former requires the referral courts to determine the “validity”
of an arbitration agreement whereas the latter requires determining only the “existence”, yet since
both the provisions are complementary to each other insofar as they both deal with the power of
courts to refer the parties to arbitration, the aspect of “existence” as specified under Section 11
should be seen construed along with the aspect of “validity” as specified under Section 8. It held that
both the provisions insofar as the standard of scrutiny by the referral courts is concerned, ought to
be compositely construed, irrespective of whether the jurisdiction is being exercised by the courts
under Section 8 or 11 of the Act, 1996. Accordingly, it held that the exercise of power of prima facie
judicial review to examine the existence of arbitration agreement also includes going into the
validity of the arbitration agreement and even objections as to the arbitrability of the subject-matter.
It also held that the referral court, while exercising its powers under Section(s) 8 and 11 respectively
of the Act, 1996 is empowered, to enter scrutiny for determining and ultimately knocking down ex
facie meritless, frivolous and dishonest litigation so as to ensure expeditious and efficient disposal at
the referral stage and prevent unnecessary subjugation to arbitration. The relevant observations
read as under: -
“147.4. Most jurisdictions accept and require prima facie review by the court on
non-arbitrability aspects at the referral stage.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
55
147.5. Sections 8 and 11 of the Arbitration Act are complementary provisions as was
held in Patel Engg. Ltd. [SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618] The object
and purpose behind the two provisions is identical to compel and force parties to
abide by their contractual understanding. This being so, the two provisions should be
read as laying down similar standard and not as laying down different and separate
parameters. Section 11 does not prescribe any standard of judicial review by the court
for determining whether an arbitration agreement is in existence.
Section 8 states that the judicial review at the stage of reference is prima facie and not final. Prima
facie standard equally applies when the power of judicial review is exercised by the court under
Section 11 of the Arbitration Act. Therefore, we can read the mandate of valid arbitration agreement
in Section 8 into mandate of Section 11, that is, “existence of an arbitration agreement”. 147.6.
Exercise of power of prima facie judicial review of existence as including validity is justified as a
court is the first forum that examines and decides the request for the referral. Absolute “hands off”
approach would be counterproductive and harm arbitration, as an alternative dispute resolution
mechanism. Limited, yet effective intervention is acceptable as it does not obstruct but effectuates
arbitration.
xxx xxx xxx 147.11. The interpretation appropriately balances the allocation of the decision-making
authority between the court at the referral stage and the arbitrators' primary jurisdiction to decide
disputes on merits. The court as the judicial forum of the first instance can exercise prima facie test
jurisdiction to screen and knock down ex facie meritless, frivolous and dishonest litigation. Limited
jurisdiction of the courts ensures expeditious, alacritous and efficient disposal when required at the
referral stage.” “148. Section 43(1) of the Arbitration Act states that the Limitation Act, 1963 shall
apply to arbitrations as it applies to court proceedings. Sub-section (2) states that for the purposes
of the Arbitration Act and Limitation Act, arbitration shall be deemed to have commenced on the
date referred to in Section 21. Limitation law is procedural and normally disputes, being factual,
would be for the arbitrator to decide guided by the facts found and the law applicable. The court at
the referral stage can interfere only when it is manifest that the claims are ex facie time-barred and
dead, or there is no subsisting dispute. All other cases should be referred to the Arbitral Tribunal for
decision on merits. Similar would be the position in case of disputed “no-claim certificate” or
defence on the plea of novation and “accord and satisfaction”. [...] (Emphasis supplied)
56. The final conclusion of this Court in Vidya Drolia (supra) read as under: -
“154.1. Ratio of the decision in Patel Engg. Ltd. [SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005)
8 SCC 618] on the scope of judicial review by the court while deciding an application
under Sections 8 or 11 of the Arbitration Act, post the amendments by Act 3 of 2016
(with retrospective effect from 23-10-2015) and even post the amendments vide Act
33 of 2019 (with effect from 9-8-2019), is no longer applicable.
154.2. Scope of judicial review and jurisdiction of the court under Sections 8 and 11 of
the Arbitration Act is identical but extremely limited and restricted.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
56
154.3. The general rule and principle, in view of the legislative mandate clear from
Act 3 of 2016 and Act 33 of 2019, and the principle of severability and competence
competence, is that the Arbitral Tribunal is the preferred first authority to determine
and decide all questions of non arbitrability. The court has been conferred power of
“second look” on aspects of non-arbitrability post the award in terms of sub-clauses
(i), (ii) or (iv) of Section 34(2)(a) or sub-clause (i) of Section 34(2)(b) of the
Arbitration Act.
154.4. Rarely as a demurrer the court may interfere at Section 8 or 11 stage when it is
manifestly and ex facie certain that the arbitration agreement is non-existent, invalid
or the disputes are non-arbitrable, though the nature and facet of non-arbitrability
would, to some extent, determine the level and nature of judicial scrutiny. The
restricted and limited review is to check and protect parties from being forced to
arbitrate when the matter is demonstrably “non arbitrable” and to cut off the
deadwood. The court by default would refer the matter when contentions relating to
non arbitrability are plainly arguable; when consideration in summary proceedings
would be insufficient and inconclusive;
when facts are contested; when the party opposing arbitration adopts delaying tactics or impairs
conduct of arbitration proceedings. This is not the stage for the court to enter into a mini trial or
elaborate review so as to usurp the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal but to affirm and uphold
integrity and efficacy of arbitration as an alternative dispute resolution mechanism.” (Emphasis
supplied)
57. As is clear from the aforesaid extract, Vidya Drolia (supra) held that although the arbitral
tribunal is the preferred first authority to determine the questions pertaining to non-arbitrability,
yet the referral court may exercise its limited jurisdiction to refuse reference to arbitration in cases
which are ex-facie frivolous and where it is certain that the disputes are non-arbitrable.
58. What can be discerned from the aforesaid is that while the enlarged scope and extent of judicial
intervention at the referral stage as held in SBP & Co. (supra) was legislatively overruled by the
insertion of Section 11 sub-section (6A) in the Act, 1996, the avowed legislative intent of minimal
judicial intervention was still far from being achieved, partly due to the misconception created in the
position of law as regards ambit of scrutiny under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 by Vidya Drolia
(supra). Although, Vidya Drolia (supra) predominantly found favour with the principal of minimal
interference at the stage of Section 11 sub-section (6) petitions by referral courts in light of the
introduction of Section 11sub-section (6A) to the Act, 1996, yet it still proceeded in a somewhat
wrong direction on two counts; first, by conflating the scope and standard of scrutiny by the referral
courts under Section 8 with that under Section 11 and secondly, by carving out an exceptional
category of cases in which interference by the referral court was permissible, that being disputes
where it is manifestly and ex-facie certain that the arbitration agreement is non-existent, invalid or
the dispute is meritless or non-arbitrable.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
57
59. The precarious situation that was created by Vidya Drolia (supra) is evident from the subsequent
decisions of this Court in DLF Home Developers Ltd. v. Rajapura Homes (P) Ltd. reported in (2021)
16 SCC 743 and BSNL v. Nortel Networks (India) (P) Ltd., reported in (2021) 5 SCC 738 and a
catena of other decisions wherein it was held that while undertaking a prima facie review under
Section 11 of the Act, 1996, the interference of the courts in certain aspects and merits of the
subject-matter may be warranted in exceptional cases, to weed out any frivolous or vexatious claims
and prevent wastage of public and private resources.
60. The next chapter in the saga of scope and ambit of Section 11 of the Act, 1996 came in the form
of the seven-Judge Bench decision of this Court in In Re:
Interplay Between Arbitration Agreements under the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act 1996 and the Indian Stamp Act 1899 reported in 2023 INSC 1066 wherein one of
us (J.B. Pardiwala J.) as part of the Bench, undertook a comprehensive analysis of
Section(s) 8 and 11 respectively of the Act, 1996 and, inter alia, made poignant
observations about the nature of the power vested in the Courts insofar as the aspect
of appointment of arbitrator is concerned. It held that the referral court, be it the
High Court or the Supreme Court under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 shall examine
only the existence of a prima facie arbitration agreement and not any other issues.
The relevant observations read as under: -
“185. The corollary of the doctrine of competence-competence is that courts may only
examine whether an arbitration agreement exists on the basis of the prima facie
standard of review. The nature of objections to the jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal
on the basis that stamp-duty has not been paid or is inadequate is such as cannot be
decided on a prima facie basis. Objections of this kind will require a detailed
consideration of evidence and submissions and a finding as to the law as well as the
facts. Obligating the court to decide issues of stamping at the Section 8 or Section 11
stage will defeat the legislative intent underlying the Arbitration Act.
186. The purpose of vesting courts with certain powers under Sections 8 and 11 of the
Arbitration Act is to facilitate and enable arbitration as well as to ensure that parties
comply with arbitration agreements. The disputes which have arisen between them
remain the domain of the arbitral tribunal (subject to the scope of its jurisdiction as
defined by the arbitration clause). [...]
209. The above extract indicates that the Supreme Court or High Court at the stage of
the appointment of an arbitrator shall “examine the existence of a prima facie
arbitration only pertain to the validity of the arbitration agreement, but also include
any other issues which are a consequence of unnecessary judicial interference in the
arbitration proceedings. Accordingly, the “other issues” also include examination and
impounding of an unstamped instrument by the referral court at the Section 8 or
Section 11 stage. The process of examination, impounding, and dealing with an
unstamped instrument under the Stamp Act is not a timebound process, and
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
58
therefore does not align with the stated goal of the Arbitration Act to ensure
expeditious and time-bound appointment of arbitrators. [...]” (Emphasis supplied)
61. In SBI General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Krish Spinning, reported in 2024 INSC 532 one of us (J.B.
Pardiwala J.) taking note of the state of flux surrounding the legal position on the scope and extent
of judicial scrutiny permissible under Section 11 of the Act, 1996, held that the courts at the referral
stage should not venture into contested questions involving complex facts. It was held that the
observations made in Vidya Drolia (supra) insofar as it allowed the referral courts under Section 11
of the Act, 1996 to intervene and refuse appointment of an arbitrator in matters that were ex-facie
meritless, frivolous, vexatious or deadwood, no longer could be said to hold field in view of the
observations made in the subsequent and larger bench decision of In Re:
Interplay (supra). The relevant observations read as under: -
“98. What follows from the negative facet of arbitral autonomy when applied in the
context of Section 16 is that the national courts are prohibited from interfering in
matters pertaining to the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal, as exclusive jurisdiction
on those aspects vests with the arbitral tribunal. The legislative mandate of prima
facie determination at the stage of Sections 8 and 11 respectively ensures that the
referral courts do not end up venturing into what is intended by the legislature to be
the exclusive domain of the arbitral tribunal.
xxx xxx xxx
113. Referring to the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Arbitration and
Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015, it was observed in In Re: Interplay (supra) that
the High Court and the Supreme Court at the stage of appointment of arbitrator shall
examine the existence of a prima facie arbitration agreement and not any other
issues. [...]
114. In view of the observations made by this Court in In Re:
Interplay (supra), it is clear that the scope of enquiry at the stage of appointment of
arbitrator is limited to the scrutiny of prima facie existence of the arbitration
agreement, and nothing else. For this reason, we find it difficult to hold that the
observations made in Vidya Drolia (supra) and adopted in NTPC v. SPML (supra)
that the jurisdiction of the referral court when dealing with the issue of “accord and
satisfaction” under Section 11 extends to weeding out ex-facie non-arbitrable and
frivolous disputes would continue to apply despite the subsequent decision in In Re:
Interplay (supra).
xxx xxx xxx
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
59
125. We are also of the view that ex-facie frivolity and dishonesty in litigation is an
aspect which the arbitral tribunal is equally, if not more, capable to decide upon the
appreciation of the evidence adduced by the parties. We say so because the arbitral
tribunal has the benefit of going through all the relevant evidence and pleadings in
much more detail than the referral court. If the referral court is able to see the
frivolity in the litigation on the basis of bare minimum pleadings, then it would be
incorrect to doubt that the arbitral tribunal would not be able to arrive at the same
inference, most likely in the first few hearings itself, with the benefit of extensive
pleadings and evidentiary material.”
62. Krish Spinning (supra) further held that, the scope of Section 8 is markedly
different from the scope of Section 11 of the Act, 1996 as although, both provisions
deal with the power of the courts to refer the parties to arbitration, yet the reason
why Section 8 envisages a more stricter test of determining the “validity” of the
arbitration agreement as opposed to mere “existence” under Section 11 is owed to the
fact that, Section 8 specifically enables the commencement or continuation of
arbitration during the pendency of an application under the said provision, thus,
there is no inherent danger or harm to subjecting the substantive rights of the parties
to arbitrate in a state of limbo or worse, remediless, if the courts themselves decide to
proceed in determining the validity of the arbitration agreement while the arbitral
tribunal simultaneously continues with the substantive claims. However, Section 11
on the other hand, is the very first step in commencement of arbitration proceedings,
no arbitration proceedings can commence or continue unless the application under
the said provision is decided. Furthermore, the determination by a judicial authority
under Section 8 of the Act, 1996 can be assailed by way of an appeal under Section 37,
however, a determination under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 is not appealable, thus,
the approach which the courts are expected to undertake under Section 8 viz-à-viz
Section 11, must be reflective of these nuanced differences in the scope of these
provisions.
Thus, it held that the observations of Vidya Drolia (supra) in conflating the nature of the test
envisaged under Section 8 of the Act, 1996 with that under Section 11, cannot be said to be a good
law. The relevant observations read as under: -
“108. Section 11 of the Act, 1996 is provided to give effect to the mutual intention of
the parties to settle their disputes by arbitration in situations where the parties fail to
appoint an arbitrator(s). The parameters of judicial review laid down for Section 8
differ from those prescribed for Section 11. The view taken in SBP & Co. (supra) and
affirmed in Vidya Drolia (supra) that Sections 8 and 11 respectively of the Act, 1996
are complementary in nature was legislatively overruled by the introduction of
Section 11(6-A) in 2015. Thus, although both these provisions intend to compel
parties to abide by their mutual intention to arbitrate, yet the scope of powers
conferred upon the courts under both the sections are different.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
60
109. The difference between Sections 8 and 11 respectively of the Act, 1996 is also
evident from the scope of these provisions. Some of these differences are:
i. While Section 8 empowers any ‘judicial authority’ to refer the parties to arbitration,
under Section 11, the power to refer has been exclusively conferred upon the High
Court and the Supreme Court.
ii. Under Section 37, an appeal lies against the refusal of the judicial authority to refer
the parties to arbitration, whereas no such provision for appeal exists for a refusal
under Section 11.
iii. The standard of scrutiny provided under Section 8 is that of prima facie
examination of the validity and existence of an arbitration agreement. Whereas, the
standard of scrutiny under Section 11 is confined to the examination of the existence
of the arbitration agreement.
iv. During the pendency of an application under Section 8, arbitration may
commence or continue and an award can be passed. On the other hand, under
Section 11, once there is failure on the part of the parties in appointing the arbitrator
as per the agreed procedure and an application is preferred, no arbitration
proceedings can commence or continue.
110. The scope of examination under Section 11(6-A) is confined to the existence of an
arbitration agreement on the basis of Section
7. The examination of validity of the arbitration agreement is also limited to the
requirement of formal validity such as the requirement that the agreement should be
in writing.
xxx xxx xxx
123. The power available to the referral courts has to be construed in the light of the
fact that no right to appeal is available against any order passed by the referral court
under Section 11 for either appointing or refusing to appoint an arbitrator. Thus, by
delving into the domain of the arbitral tribunal at the nascent stage of Section 11, the
referral courts also run the risk of leaving the claimant in a situation wherein it does
not have any forum to approach for the adjudication of its claims, if it Section 11
application is rejected.
124. Section 11 also envisages a time-bound and expeditious disposal of the
application for appointment of arbitrator. One of the reasons for this is also the fact
that unlike Section 8, once an application under Section 11 is filed, arbitration cannot
commence until the arbitral tribunal is constituted by the referral court. This Court,
on various occasions, has given directions to the High Courts for expeditious disposal
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
61
of pending Section 11 applications. It has also directed the litigating parties to refrain
from filing bulky pleadings in matters pertaining to Section 11.
[...]”
63. Accordingly, Krish Spinning (supra) held that the scope of enquiry at the referral stage under
Section 11 of the Act, 1996 is confined to a prima facie determination of the existence of the
arbitration agreement, and does not permit a contested or laborious enquiry into all other issues
including the conclusive existence of such arbitration agreement, which is for the arbitral tribunal
alone to ‘rule’ under Section 16. Under Section 11, the referall court’s enquiry is limited to examining
whether the application under the said provision is filed before the correct court or not, the said
application is within limitation or not in light of the decision of M/s Arif Azim Co. Ltd. v. M/s
Aptech Ltd. reported in 2024 INSC 155, and to the prima-facie existence of an arbitration
agreement. Such an approach gives true meaning to the legislative intent underlying Section 11
sub-section (6A) of the Act, 1996 and also to the view taken in In Re: Interplay (supra). The relevant
ovservations read as under: -
“111. The use of the term ‘examination’ under Section 11(6-A) as distinguished from
the use of the term ‘rule’ under Section 16 implies that the scope of enquiry under
section 11(6-A) is limited to a prima facie scrutiny of the existence of the arbitration
agreement, and does not include a contested or laborious enquiry, which is left for
the arbitral tribunal to ‘rule’ under Section 16. The prima facie view on existence of
the arbitration agreement taken by the referral court does not bind either the arbitral
tribunal or the court enforcing the arbitral award.
xxx xxx xxx
133. Thus, we clarify that while determining the issue of limitation in exercise of the
powers under Section 11(6) of the Act, 1996, the referral court should limit its enquiry
to examining whether Section 11(6) application has been filed within the period of
limitation of three years or not. The date of commencement of limitation period for
this purpose shall have to be construed as per the decision in Arif Azim (supra). As a
natural corollary, it is further clarified that the referral courts, at the stage of deciding
an application for appointment of arbitrator, must not conduct an intricate
evidentiary enquiry into the question whether the claims raised by the applicant are
time barred and should leave that question for determination by the arbitrator. Such
an approach gives true meaning to the legislative intention underlying Section
11(6-A) of the Act, and also to the view taken in In Re: Interplay (supra).
64. When the decision of this Court in Chloro Controls (supra) came, the position of law as regards
the standard of scrutiny expected by the referral courts was governed by the decision of SBP Co.
(supra), which as already discussed, was premised on the rudimentary understanding that the
arbitral tribunals are not empowered to determine issues as regards the validity and existence of the
arbitration agreement and whether the claims are time-barred or vexatious due to the
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
62
non-applicability of Section 16 in instances of court referred arbitrations. The understanding which
stemmed from SBP Co. (supra) was that the referral courts were required to conduct mini trials and
indulge in the appreciation of evidence on the aforesaid issues, even though they were inextricably
linked with the substantive merits of the subject-matter.
65. Accordingly, when Chloro Controls (supra) held that a non-signatory to the arbitration
agreement may be bound by the arbitration agreement by the doctrine of ‘Group of Companies’, the
test which it laid down for applying the said doctrine had been evolved, squarely keeping in mind
the decision of SBP Co. (supra). Which is why, Chloro Controls (supra) held that before a non-
signatory can be held to be bound by the arbitration agreement, the referral courts would have to
make a determination of all issues fundamental to making a reference to arbitration including the
issue whether a non-signatory could be said to be bound by the arbitration agreement. The net effect
of the aforesaid was that, arbitral tribunals were deemed to be incompetent to identify and implead
a non-signatory to the arbitration agreement on its own accord, as it was understood from SBP Co.
(supra), that such duty had been cast only upon the referral courts to determine.
66. However, with the subsequent developments, particularly in light of two key decisions of this
Court being In Re: Interplay (supra) and Krish Spinning (supra), it is no more res-integra, that the
extent of scrutiny of the referral courts under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 is extremely narrow, and
confined to only one aspect i.e., the prima-facie determination of the “existence” of the arbitration
agreement. Krish Spinning (supra) has categorically held that only those questions which
inextricably attacks or questions the “existence” of the arbitration agreement, should be looked into
by the referral courts, that only for the purpose of a prima-facie satisfaction, all other questions,
particularly mixed questions of law and fact fall within the exclusive jurisdiction of the arbitral
tribunal, and cannot be looked into by the referral court, even for a prima-facie determination.
Questions which involve examination of contested question of facts and appreciation of evidence,
should be left to the arbitral tribunals to decide, as it is equally, if not more capable to decide such
questions, as it has the benefit of going through all the relevant evidence and pleadings in much
more detail than the referral courts. Although the aforesaid observations were in the context of
“accord and satisfaction” yet, the principles laid therein, would, nevertheless apply with equal force
to all other issues entrenching upon the exercise of jurisdiction under Section 11 of the Act, 1996.
The relevant observations read as under: -
“115. The dispute pertaining to the “accord and satisfaction” of claims is not one
which attacks or questions the existence of the arbitration agreement in any way. As
held by us in the preceding parts of this judgment, the arbitration agreement, being
separate and independent from the underlying substantive contract in which it is
contained, continues to remain in existence even after the original contract stands
discharged by “accord and satisfaction”.
116. The question of “accord and satisfaction”, being a mixed question of law and fact,
comes within the exclusive jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal, if not otherwise
a g r e e d  u p o n  b e t w e e n  t h e  p a r t i e s .  T h u s ,  t h e  n e g a t i v e  e f f e c t  o f
competence-competence would require that the matter falling within the exclusive
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
63
domain of the arbitral tribunal, should not be looked into by the referral court, even
for a prima facie determination, before the arbitral tribunal first has had the
opportunity of looking into it.
xxx xxx xxx
125. We are also of the view that ex-facie frivolity and dishonesty in litigation is an
aspect which the arbitral tribunal is equally, if not more, capable to decide upon the
appreciation of the evidence adduced by the parties. We say so because the arbitral
tribunal has the benefit of going through all the relevant evidence and pleadings in
much more detail than the referral court. If the referral court is able to see the
frivolity in the litigation on the basis of bare minimum pleadings, then it would be
incorrect to doubt that the arbitral tribunal would not be able to arrive at the same
inference, most likely in the first few hearings itself, with the benefit of extensive
pleadings and evidentiary material.”
67. Thus, the archaic understanding that an arbitral tribunal is incapable or incompetent to identify
and implead a non-signatory to the arbitration agreement on its own accord, is not the correct
position of law, in view of the decisions of this Court in In Re: Interplay (supra) and Krish Spinning
(supra). We find, that the limited nature and scope of inquiry which the referral courts are expected
to undertake as regards the “existence” of the arbitration agreement, would as a logical sequitur
obligate the arbitral tribunal also to look into this question. Such a question, by no stretch, can be
regarded as falling within the exclusive domain or jurisdiction of the referral courts, so as to render
any examination of it by the arbitral tribunal a usurpation of the referral courts authority and duty.
c. How Cox and Kings (I) contemplates determination of mutual intention of Non-Signatories to
arbitration agreements.
68. However, even though an arbitral tribunal undoubtedly would be empowered to identify and
implead a non-signatory to the arbitration agreement on its own, yet the question still remains, if
the arbitral tribunal could be considered to be the appropriate forum for deciding this issue? In
other words, whether, the issue that a non-signatory is bound by the arbitration agreement could be
termed to be a question which inextricably attacks or questions the “existence” of the arbitration
agreement, and thus, should be looked into by the referral courts?
69. The seminal importance of the aforesaid question lies in the contention that has been
vehemently put forward before us by the appellants herein. It has been contended that when the
application under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 was filed by the respondent no. 1 herein, the appellant
herein was never made a party. In fact, in the entire application under Section 11, the respondent no.
1 never imputed any allegations or put forth any claims against the appellants herein, which would
suggest its intention to implead the appellant herein in the arbitration proceedings, or that it is
bound by the arbitration agreement. In such circumstances, it was contended by the appellant
herein, that in the absence of the appellant herein being a party to the application under Section 11
and in the absence of the referral court directing or leaving the question of impleadment of the
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
64
appellant for the arbitral tribunal to decide, the appellant herein could not have been impleaded to
the arbitration proceedings by the arbitral tribunal.
70. To put it simply, the argument of the appellant herein is that, where the non- signatory is a party
to the application under Section 11 of the Act, 1996, the referral court must first make a prima-facie
determination as to whether such non-signatory is bound by the arbitration agreement or not,
before leaving the conclusive determination of such question to the arbitral tribunal. Conversely,
where the non-signatory sought to be enjoined in arbitration is not a party to the application under
Section 11, the referral court must give leave or direct the arbitral tribunal to examine whether such
non-signatory is bound by the arbitration agreement or not, before it can be impleaded by the
arbitral tribunal on its own accord.
71. In other words, the question that has been canvassed before us for our consideration is whether,
the question that a non-signatory is bound by the arbitration agreement could be termed to be a
question which inextricably attacks or questions the “existence” of the arbitration agreement, such
that in the absence of any examination or application of mind by the referral court to such question
would render the very arbitration proceedings that has been commenced pursuant to the application
under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 to be non-est, insofar as such non-signatory is concerned. I. The
nature and extent of the test laid down in Cox and Kings (I) for determining Non-Signatories who
are bound by the arbitration agreements.
72. In order to answer the aforesaid question, we must once again look into the decision of this
Court in Cox and Kings (I) (supra), to ascertain the nature of the question whether a non-signatory
is bound by the arbitration agreement or not, and the manner in which the referral courts and the
arbitral tribunal are expected to tackle such a question.
73. Cox and Kings (I) (supra) after an exhaustive examination of the question of existence or
applicability of the ‘Group of Companies’ doctrine in a particular case, is fundamentally a
fact-intensive exercise that involves a nuanced determination of the consent of parties from diverse
factual elements and circumstances. The said doctrine and by extension any other principle for
determining mutual consent, broadly requires ascertaining the intention of the parties by analysing
the factual circumstances surrounding the contractual arrangements, particularly factors such as the
level of involvement of the non- signatory in the negotiation, conclusion (sic execution),
performance or termination of the contract, to what extent such conduct may be indicative its
position as a veritable party to the arbitration agreement and common intention to be bound by it.
Thus, it was held that the primary test for ascertaining the applicability of the ‘Group of Companies’
doctrine lies in the determination of the intention of the parties, which is to be inferred from the
surrounding factual matrix, or in other words, the inquiry or test is, by its very nature,
predominantly factual. The relevant observations read as under: -
96. [...] The level of the non-signatory party’s involvement was to the extent of
making the other party believe that it was a veritable party to the contract, and the
arbitration agreement contained under it. Therefore, the group of companies doctrine
is applied to ascertain the intentions of the parties by analysing the factual
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
65
circumstances surrounding the contractual arrangements.
101. [...] Rather, the courts need to determine: first, the existence of a group of
companies; and second, the conduct of the signatory and non-signatory parties which
indicate their common intention to make the non-signatory a party to the arbitration
agreement.95 Thus, the group of companies doctrine is similar to other consent
based doctrines such as agency, assignment, assumption, and guarantee to the extent
that it is ordinarily applied as a means of identifying the common intention of the
parties to bind the non-
signatory to the arbitration agreement.
102. [...] Thus, the existence of a group, of companies is a factual element that the court or tribunal
has to consider when analysing the consent of the parties. It inevitably adds an extra layer of criteria
to an exercise which at its core is preponderant on determining the consent of the parties in case of
complex transactions involving multiple parties and agreements.
105. In multi-party agreements, the courts or tribunals will have to examine the corporate structure
to determine whether both the signatory and non signatory parties belong to the same group. This
evaluation is fact specific and must be carried out in accordance with the appropriate principles of
company law. Once the existence of the corporate group is established, the next step is the
determination of whether there was a mutual intention of all the parties to bind the non-signatory to
the arbitration agreement.
109. [...] The primary test to apply the group of companies doctrine is by determining the intention
of the parties on the basis of the underlying factual circumstances. The application of the group of
companies doctrine will serve to stymie satellite litigation by non-signatory members of the
corporate group, thereby ensuring the efficacy of the agreement between the parties.
74. From above, it is manifest that the test for determining the applicability of the ‘Group of
Companies’ doctrine is intrinsically factual in nature, necessitating a close and context-specific
inquiry. However, Cox and Kings (I) (supra) did not merely stop at just establishing the factual
nature of such an exercise, but further proceeded to expound, the extent and depth in which the
aforementioned factual factors must be determined in the course of such exercise by laying down the
threshold standards for determining the applicability of the said doctrine. Placing reliance on one
another decision of this Court in Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. v. Discovery Enterprises Pvt.
Ltd. reported in (2022) 8 SCC 42, it held that the test for determining applicability of the ‘Group of
Companies’ doctrine envisages a cumulative and holistic determination of the factual aspects such
as the relationship between and among the legal entities within the corporate group structure, their
underlying contractual obligations, the commonality of the subject matter and the composite nature
of the transactions undertaken, and their overall participation in the project / subject-matter for
achieving a common purpose. The relevant observations read as under: -
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
66
“110. In Discovery Enterprises (supra), this Court refined and clarified the cumulative
factors that the courts and tribunals should consider in deciding whether a company
within a group of companies is bound by the arbitration agreement:
“40. In deciding whether a company within a group of companies which is not a
signatory to arbitration agreement would nonetheless be bound by it, the law
considers the following factors:
(i) The mutual intent of the parties;
(ii) The relationship of a non-signatory to a party which is a signatory to the
agreement;
(iii) The commonality of the subject-matter;
(iv) The composite nature of the transactions; and
(v) The performance of the contract.”
75. Cox and Kings (I) (supra) observed that doctrines such as ‘Group of Companies’ being a
consent-based theory, as a necessary implication requires that the inquiry must not be superficial or
perfunctory but must instead involve a comprehensive and holistic assessment of the composite
relationship among the entities concerned, the underlying transactions, and the attendant
circumstances evincing mutual intention to be bound by the arbitration agreement. Endorsing the
view taken in Discovery Enterprises (supra), it held that mere incidental involvement in the
negotiation or performance of the contract is not sufficient to infer the consent of the non-signatory
to be bound by the underlying contract or its arbitration agreement. The evaluation must be
indicative that the involvement of the non-signatory was of such manner which was sufficient to
lead the other parties to legitimately believe that the non-signatory was a veritable party to the
contract. The relevant observations read as under: -
“111. Since the group of companies doctrine is a consent based theory, its application
depends upon the consideration of a variety of factual elements to establish the
mutual intention of all the parties involved. In other words, the group of companies
doctrine is a means to infer the mutual intentions of both the signatory and
non-signatory parties to be bound by the arbitration agreement. The relationship
between and among the legal entities within the corporate group structure and the
involvement of the parties in the performance of the underlying contractual
obligations are indicators to determine the mutual intentions of the parties. The
other factors such as the commonality of the subject matter, composite nature of the
transactions, and the performance of the contract ought to be cumulatively
considered and analysed by courts and tribunals to identify the intention of the
parties to bind the non-signatory party to the arbitration agreement. [...]
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
67
112. [...] However, we clarify that mere presence of a commercial relationship
between the signatory and non-signatory parties is not sufficient to infer “legal
relationship” between and among the parties. If this factor is applied solely, any
related entity or company may be impleaded even when it does not have any rights or
obligations under the underlying contract and did not take part in the performance of
the contract. The group of companies doctrine cannot be applied to abrogate party
consent and autonomy. The doctrine, properly conceptualised and applied, gives
effect to mutual intent and autonomy.
121. Evaluating the involvement of the non-signatory party in the negotiation,
performance, or termination of a contract is an important factor for a number of
reasons. First, by being actively involved in the performance of a contract, a
non-signatory may create an appearance that it is a veritable party to the contract
containing the arbitration agreement; second, the conduct of the non signatory may
be in harmony with the conduct of the other members of the group, leading the other
party to legitimately believe that the non-signatory was a veritable party to the
contract; and third, the other party has legitimate reasons to rely on the appearance
created by the non-signatory party so as to bind it to the arbitration agreement.
122. [...] Rather, the courts or tribunals should closely evaluate the overall conduct
and involvement of the non-signatory party in the performance of the contract. The
nature or standard of involvement of the non-signatory in the performance of the
contract should be such that the non-signatory has actively assumed obligations or
performance upon itself under the contract. In other words, the test is to determine
whether the non-
signatory has a positive, direct, and substantial involvement in the negotiation, performance, or
termination of the contract. Mere incidental involvement in the negotiation or performance of the
contract is not sufficient to infer the consent of the non signatory to be bound by the underlying
contract or its arbitration agreement.
127. We are of the opinion that there is a need to seek a balance between the consensual nature of
arbitration and the modern commercial reality where a non-signatory becomes implicated in a
commercial transaction in a number of different ways. Such a balance can be adequately achieved if
the factors laid down under Discovery Enterprises (supra) are applied holistically. For instance, the
involvement of the non-signatory in the performance of the underlying contract in a manner that
suggests that it intended to be bound by the contract containing the arbitration agreement is an
important aspect. Other factors such as the composite nature of transaction and commonality of
subject matter would suggest that the claims against the non-signatory were strongly inter-linked
with the subject matter of the tribunal’s jurisdiction. Looking at the factors holistically, it could be
inferred that the non-signatories, by virtue of their relationship with the signatory parties and active
involvement in the performance of commercial obligations which are intricately linked to the subject
matter, are not actually strangers to the dispute between the signatory parties.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
68
128. We hold that all the cumulative factors laid down in Discovery Enterprises (supra) must be
considered while determining the applicability of the group of companies doctrine. However, the
application of the above factors has to be fact- specific, and this Court cannot tie the hands of the
courts or tribunals by laying down how much weightage they ought to give to the above factors. This
approach ensures that a dogmatic emphasis on express consent is eschewed in favour of a modern
approach to consent which focuses on the factual analysis, complexity of commercial projects, and
thereby increases the relevance of arbitration in multi-party disputes. [...] (Emphasis supplied)
76. Owing to the intrinsic character of the test — being one that entails a fact- intensive inquiry
involving a mixed question of fact and law — and further, given the extensive standard it demands,
requiring a comprehensive and holistic appraisal of all material facts and attendant circumstances,
it may be safely concluded that the arbitral tribunal is the more appropriate and competent forum to
adjudicate upon the issue of whether a non-signatory is bound by the arbitration agreement, as the
arbitral as it has the innate advantage of going through all the relevant evidence and pleadings in
greater depth and detail than the referral court at the pre-reference stage, and as such is uniquely
positioned to undertake such a nuanced determination. II. Determining the “existence” viz-à-viz the
intention of parties from “express words” of an Arbitration Agreement.
77. In order to resolve the question whether the issue of a non-signatory being bound by an
arbitration agreement could be said to be inextricably intertwined with the determination of the
“existence” of the arbitration agreement, it is apposite to once again advert to Cox and Kings (I)
(supra), more particularly, as to the manner in which it envisages the identification and
determination of the binding effect of an arbitration agreement upon a non-signatory, based on the
factual aspects delineated by it, as mentioned in the foregoing paragraphs.
78. Cox and Kings (I) (supra) observed that the “legal relationship of a non- signatory to a party
which is a signatory to the agreement” must be analyzed in the context of the underlying substantive
contract which contains the arbitration agreement. This may be ascertained either from the duty or
relationship attributed to the non-signatory within the underlying contract or may be inferred from
its conduct with respect to such contract. If the underlying contract forms basis for a subject-matter
common to both the signatory and the non-signatory or any composite transaction by them, then it
would be a positive indicum for inferring the consent of the non-signatory to arbitrate with respect
to the subject-matter. Transactions by a non-signatory which are interlinked with the underlying
contract in such manner, in the absence of which the performance of the contract may not be
feasible, is one another instance for inferring this consent. Placing reliance on Chloro Controls
(supra) it observed that factors such as “commonality of the subject- matter” or “composite
transaction” would have to be gathered from the conjoint reading of the principal and
supplementary agreements on the one hand, and the intention of the parties and their conduct on
the other. Amongst these, the participation of the non-signatory in the performance of the
underlying contract is the most crucial factor to discern the intention of the parties.
“112. Section 7 of the Arbitration Act broadly talks about an agreement by the parties in respect of a
defined legal relationship, whether contractual or not. Such a legal relationship must give rise to
legal obligations and duties. In a corporate group, a company may have various related companies.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
69
The legal relationship must be analysed in the context of the underlying contract containing the
arbitration agreement. The nature of the contractual relationship can either be formally encrusted in
the underlying contract, or it can also be inferred from the conduct of the signatory and
non-signatory parties with respect to such contract. [...]
115. In case of multiple parties, the necessity of a common subject- matter and composite
transaction is an important factual indicator. An arbitration agreement arises out of a defined legal
relationship between the parties with respect to a particular subject matter. Commonality of the
subject matter indicates that the conduct of the non-signatory party must be related to the subject
matter of the arbitration agreement. For instance, if the subject matter of the contract underlying
the arbitration agreement pertains to distribution of healthcare goods, the conduct of the
non-signatory party should also be connected or in pursuance of the contractual duties and
obligations, that is, pertaining to the distribution of healthcare goods. The determination of this
factor is important to demonstrate that the non-signatory party consented to arbitrate with respect
to the particular subject matter.
116. In case of a composite transaction involving multiple agreements, it would be incumbent for the
courts and tribunals to assess whether the agreements are consequential or in the nature of a
follow-up to the principal agreement. This Court in Canara Bank (supra) observed that a composite
transaction refers to a situation where the transaction is interlinked in nature or where the
performance of the principal agreement may not be feasible without the aid, execution, and
performance of the supplementary or ancillary agreements.
117. The general position of law is that parties will be referred to arbitration under the principal
agreement if there is a situation where there are disputes and differences “in connection with” the
main agreement and also disputes “connected with” the subject- matter of the principal agreement
In Chloro Controls (supra), this Court clarified that the principle of “composite performance” would
have to be gathered from the conjoint reading of the principal and supplementary agreements on the
one hand, and the explicit intention of the parties and attendant circumstances on the other. The
common participation in the commercial project by the signatory and non signatory parties for the
purposes of achieving a common purpose could be an indicator of the fact that all the parties
intended the non-signatory party to be bound by the arbitration agreement. [...]”
118. The participation of the non-signatory in the performance of the underlying contract is the most
important factor to be considered by the courts and tribunals. The conduct of the non- signatory
parties is an indicator of the intention of the non- signatory to be bound by the arbitration
agreement. The intention of the parties to be bound by an arbitration agreement can be gauged from
the circumstances that surround the participation of the non signatory party in the negotiation,
performance, and termination of the underlying contract containing such agreement. The
UNIDROIT Principle of International Commercial Contract, 201698 provides that the subjective
intention of the parties could be ascertained by having regard to the following circumstances:
(a) preliminary negotiations between the parties;
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
70
(b) practices which the parties have established between themselves;
(c) the conduct of the parties subsequent to the conclusion of the contract;
(d) the nature and purpose of the contract;
(e) the meaning commonly given to terms and expressions in the trade concerned;
and
(f) usages.
(Emphasis supplied)
79. What can be discerned from the above is that, the entire exercise of determining whether a
non-signatory is bound by an arbitration agreement, in contradistinction to the narrow question of
the "existence" of the arbitration agreement, necessitates a far more expansive inquiry. This inquiry
transcends the limited question of the mere "existence" as it entails an interpretation of the scope
and contours of the principal agreement, an assessment of the commercial understanding between
the parties, examination of the nature and purpose underlying the principal contract, and the
character of the transactions and conduct of the parties viz-à-viz the object and wisdom of the
parties underlying contractual arrangement. Such an exercise mandates a detailed and comparative
evaluation of the substantive provisions of both the principal and supplementary agreements, and
not merely of the arbitration agreement or clause in isolation.
80. The determination of the "existence" of an arbitration agreement, by contrast, is confined to
examining the formal validity of the arbitration agreement or the arbitration clause itself, where
only the arbitration agreement or clause, as the case may be has to be looked into. It does not
require delving into the broader legal relationships emerging from the underlying contractual
framework. Cox and Kings (I) (supra) specifically mandates a holistic appraisal of the principal and
supplementary agreements in tandem with the parties' intention and conduct, thereby demanding
an inquiry far more extensive than that required for the mere establishment of the existence of the
arbitration agreement.
81. Thus, by no stretch of imagination can the issue of whether a non-signatory is bound by the
arbitration agreement be characterized as one that is either significant or sine qua non to the
determination of the arbitration agreement’s “existence”. The former necessitates a substantive
examination of the entire contractual relationship, whereas the latter is a limited exercise directed
only at confirming the formal validity of the arbitration agreement itself. Such a question is not one
of “existence” of the arbitration agreement, but one of interpretation and scope of the principle
agreement.
82. In this regard, reliance may be placed on the concurring opinion of P.S. Narasimha J. in Cox and
Kings (I) (supra), who observed that the existence of an arbitration agreement qua a non-signatory
is a matter of interpretation and construction of the written material in terms of Section 7(4)(b)
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
71
from which a non-signatory’s consent and intention can be deciphered. For ascertaining the true
meaning of the express words, the court or tribunal may look into the surrounding circumstances
such as nature and object of the contract and the conduct of the parties during the formation,
performance, and discharge of the contract. The relevant observations read as under: -
“52. [...] An arbitration agreement, being a contract, must necessarily be in writing,
as against an oral agreement, but need not be signed by the parties. The written
arbitration agreement can be in the form of a document signed by the parties, or be
evidenced in the record of agreement. Section 7(4)(b) prescribes the written material
from which a non-signatory’s consent and intention can be deciphered by a court or
arbitral tribunal.
53. The existence of an arbitration agreement with a non signatory is a matter of
interpretation and construction. The express words employed by the parties enable
the court to ascertain the intention of the parties and their agreement to resolve
disputes through arbitration. For ascertaining the true meaning of the express words,
the court or tribunal may look into the surrounding circumstances such as nature and
object of the contract and the conduct of the parties during the formation,
performance, and discharge of the contract. While interpreting and constructing the
contract, courts or tribunals may adopt well established principles, which aid and
assist proper adjudication and determination. The Group of Companies doctrine is
one such principle. It may be adopted by courts or arbitral tribunals while
interpreting the record of agreement to determine whether the non signatory
company is a party to it.
54. Although the application of the Group of Companies doctrine in India has until
now been independent of Section 7, its juxtaposition with Section 7(4)(b) case-law
shows that the inquiry under both is premised on determining the mutual intention
of parties to submit to arbitration. The mutual intention of the parties is discernible
from their conduct in the performance of the contract and this inquiry is common to
Section 7(4)(b) jurisprudence and the Group of Companies doctrine. Even the
precedents on the doctrine, national and international, look to additional factors
beyond the non-signatory being in the same group of companies, such as
commonality of subject-matter, composite nature of transaction, and
interdependence of the performance of the contracts to determine mutual intent.”
83. The subsequent observations of P.S. Narasimha J. in his concurring opinion in Cox and Kings (I)
(supra) are of significance, and read as under: -
“55. Since the fundamental issue before the court or tribunal under Section 7(4)(b)
and the Group of Companies doctrine is the same, the doctrine can be subsumed
within Section 7(4)(b). Consequently, the record of agreement that evidences conduct
of the non-signatory in the formation, performance, and termination of the contract
and surrounding circumstances such as its direct relationship with the signatory
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
72
parties, commonality of subject matter, and composite nature of transaction, must be
comprehensively used to ascertain the existence of the arbitration agreement with the
non-signatory. In this inquiry, the fact of a no signatory being a part of the same
group of companies will strengthen its conclusion. In this light, there is no difficulty
in applying the Group of Companies doctrine as it would be statutorily anchored in
Section 7 of the Act.”
84. From the above exposition of law, it can be seen that this Court in Cox and Kings (I) (supra)
recognized that there exists a fine but pertinent distinction between determining the “existence” of
an arbitration agreement and determining the intention of the parties from the “express words”
used in the arbitration agreement, when dealing with the question whether a non- signatory is
bound by the arbitration agreement or not. The former only deals with determining whether an
arbitration agreement exists and is present in the record of agreement or the written materials as
delineated under Section 7 sub- section (4)(b) of the Act, 1996. The latter, in contrast, involves
construction and interpretation of the “express words” that has been used in such material from the
surrounding circumstances such as nature and object of the contract and the conduct of the parties
during the formation, performance, and discharge of the contract, and how the arbitration
agreement fits within the broader contractual framework.
85. Once the referral court, identifies an arbitration agreement that satisfies the formal
requirements of Section 7 of the Act, 1996, either from the record of agreement or the written
materials under sub-section (4), the “existence” of the arbitration agreement is said to have been
established, even though, its binding nature qua the non-signatory may not be established, as it is
entirely possible for a referral court to arrive at finding that prima-facie there exists an arbitration
agreement in terms of Section 7 of the Act, 1996 without resolving the question of whether a
non-signatory is bound by such arbitration agreement or not, as it depends on additional factors
beyond mere existence.
86. Once, the “existence” of the arbitration agreement is said to have been established, the condition
stipulated in terms of Section 11 sub-section (6A) of the Act, 1996, is said to have been fulfilled, and
the referral courts have no option but to refer the dispute to arbitration, notwithstanding whether
the intention of a non-signatory as a veritable partly to such agreement is established or not. Apart
from the pre-condition of examining the “existence” of an arbitration agreement, Section 11 of the
Act, 1996 does not either contemplate or require determination of the "defined legal relationship" in
terms of Section 7, nor does it mandate an assessment of the futuro intention of the parties, whether
signatories or non-signatories, from the "express words" of the arbitration agreement. This limited
inquiry does not extend to the substantive legal consequences or implications of such arbitration
agreement. The question of whether a non-signatory is bound by the arbitration agreement is
entirely separate from the question of its "existence." The latter is a relatively straightforward,
procedural determination based on the formal presence of the agreement, whereas the former
involves a substantive and contextual inquiry into the mutual intent of the parties, which may be
examined by the arbitral tribunal.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
73
87. What follows from this is that, the question whether a non-signatory is bound by the arbitration
agreement is completely independent of the question concerning the “existence” of an arbitration
agreement. The two inquiries — while related — are distinct in nature and function. The "existence"
of an arbitration agreement pertains solely to its formal presence in the contractual documentation,
as per the requirements under the Act, 1996 and once established, it obligates the referral of the
dispute to arbitration. By contrast, the question of whether a non-signatory is bound by the
arbitration agreement involves a more nuanced determination of the parties' intentions, contractual
relationships, and the broader context of the agreement, which is not confined to the formal text of
the arbitration clause alone.
88. Thus, even in the absence of the non-signatory being made a party to the proceedings before the
referral court, and where the question of its impleadment has neither been raised nor addressed or
left open to the arbitral tribunal by the referral court, the arbitral tribunal would be full empowered
to examine this issue in the first instance and determine whether any non- signatory is bound by the
arbitration agreement based on the factual circumstances of the case, and if necessary, implead such
non-signatory to the arbitration proceedings.
89. P.S. Narasimha J. in his concurring opinion in Cox and Kings (I) (supra), observed that the
exercise of determining the binding nature of an arbitration agreement qua a non-signatory is an
inquiry pertaining to the interpretation and construction of the agreement for determining the
mutual intention, and not the existence of such agreement. We are conscious of the fact that, at
paragraph 55, P.S. Narasimha J. observed that the inquiry is to “ascertain the existence of the
arbitration agreement with the non-signatory” Semantically, the exercise may well be said to be one
for determining the “existence” of an arbitration agreement with the non-signatory, however, the
aforesaid observations cannot be singled out and construed devoid of its context. It must be seen in
light of the observations made in the majority opinion at paragraphs 102 and 103, wherein this issue
of “existence of the arbitration agreement with the non-signatory” or to put it simply, whether the
non-signatory is a veritable party to the arbitration agreement or not, was described as an “extra
layer of criteria” and that such an exercise is only to “discern the true “party” in interest”. The
relevant observations read as under: -
“102. [...] Thus, the existence of a group of companies is a factual element that the
court or tribunal has to consider when analysing the consent of the parties. It
inevitably adds an extra layer of criteria to an exercise which at its core is
preponderant on determining the consent of the parties in case of complex
transactions involving multiple parties and agreements.
103. [...] the group of companies doctrine helps in decoding the layered structure of commercial
arrangements to unravel the true intention of the parties to bind someone who is not formally a
signatory to the contract, but has “assumed” the obligation to be bound by the actions of a signatory.
This court explained the purport of the doctrine to discern the “true” party in interest [...]”
(Emphasis supplied)
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
74
90. This is further fortified from the fact that, Cox and Kings (I) (supra) in its subsequent
paragraphs, more particularly paragraph no. 164, while discussing the scope of Section 11 of the Act,
1996, distinctively refers to and treats the criterion of “existence of arbitration agreement” and
“veritable party to the arbitration agreement”, as two separate and independent inquiries, thereby
underscoring that the determination of the existence of an arbitration agreement stands apart from
the assessment of whether a non-signatory can be bound to it.
91. In Ajay Madhusudan Patel & Ors. v. Jyotrindra S. Patel & Ors. reported in 2024 INSC 710, this
Court comprising one of us, (J.B. Pardiwala J.) further brought this distinction into perspective by
observing that the issue concerning the “existence of the arbitration agreement qua the
non-signatory” is, in substance an issue of “consent”, as it involves determining the manifestation of
consent of parties or entities through their actions and conduct of exchange of documents (sic or
otherwise) in terms of Section 7 sub-section (4) of the Act, 1996, and not one of “existence of
arbitration agreement” simpliciter, as such an issue inter-alia requires examination and thorough
consideration of the underlying contract in addition to the arbitration agreement. The relevant
observations read as under: -
“66. It is well settled that an arbitration agreement, in order to qualify as a valid
agreement, has to satisfy the requirements stipulated under Section 7 of the Act, 1996
along with the principles of law under the Indian Contract Act, 1872. Having regard
to the submissions of both the Respondent Groups i.e., JRS and SRG, it can be said
that they have raised manifold objections to the present petition, however, none of
those objections question or deny the existence of the arbitration agreement under
which the arbitration has been invoked by the Petitioner AMP Group. In fact, the JRS
Group has no objection to resolve the disputes with the AMP Group by way of
arbitration. Their primary objection is only that the SRG Group cannot be a part of
the arbitration proceedings. Therefore, the requirement of prima facie existence of an
arbitration agreement, as stated under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 is satisfied.
67. However, the core issue that falls for our consideration is whether the SRG
Group, being a non-signatory to the FAA can also be referred to arbitration and
whether they are “veritable” parties to the arbitration agreement.
68. [...] Persons or entities who have not formally signed the arbitration agreement or
the underlying contract containing the arbitration agreement may also intend to be
bound by the terms of the agreement. Further, the requirement of a written
agreement under Section 7 of the Act, 1996 does not exclude the possibility of binding
non-signatory parties if there is a defined legal relationship between the signatory
and non-signatory parties.
Therefore, the issue as to who is a “party” to an arbitration agreement is primarily an issue of
consent. Actions or conduct could be an indicator of the consent of a party to be bound by the
arbitration agreement. This aspect is also evident from a reading of Section 7(4)(b) which
emphasises on the manifestation of the consent of persons or entities through actions of exchanging
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
75
documents.” (Emphasis supplied)
92. Thus, what has been conveyed in so many words by Ajay Madhusudan Patel (supra) is that the
inquiry into whether a non-signatory is bound by an arbitration agreement is not, in its essence, an
inquiry into the formal or juridical existence of the arbitration agreement itself. It is an exercise of
determining the functional concept of consent within the existing arbitration agreement rather than
the existence of the arbitration agreement itself. It is to cull out and discern the intention of various
parties — whether signatories or otherwise — in relation to their willingness to be bound by the
arbitration mechanism embedded in the contract.
93. Put differently, although notionally the exercise of determining ‘existence of the arbitration
agreement qua the non-signatory’, may, on the surface appear to be concerned with the arbitration
agreement or clause in question, yet one must be mindful that the actual focus of such exercise lies
in determining the existence of consent of the parties through fact patterns to such arbitration
agreement or clause and not vice-versa. It is the existence of mutual consent to arbitrate — not the
formal existence of the arbitration agreement — that is the heart of this inquiry.
94. There runs no umbilical cord between the exercise of determining the “existence of the
arbitration agreement” and determining its “existence qua the non-signatory”. The latter is an
independent and substantive determination that falls outside the narrow and circumscribed domain
of the referral court’s singular obligation under Section 11 sub-section (6A) of the Act, 1996 and as
such cannot be conflated to be one pertaining to or attacking the “existence” of an arbitration.
95. Even if it is assumed for a moment that the referral court in its jurisdiction under Section 11 of
the Act, 1996 has the discretion to determine whether a non-signatory is a veritable party to the
arbitration agreement or not, by virtue of Cox and Kings (I) (supra), the referral court should only
refrain but rather loathe the exercise of such discretion. Any discretion which is conferred upon any
authority, be it referral courts must be exercised reasonably and in a fair manner. Fairness in this
context does not just extend to a non-signatory’s rights and its apprehension of prejudice, fairness
also demands that the arbitration proceedings is given due time to gestate so that the entire dispute
is holistically decided. Any determination even if prima-facie by a referral court on such aspects
would entail an inherent risk of frustrating the very purpose of resolution of dispute, if the referral
courts opine that a non- signatory in question is not a veritable party. On the other hand, the
apprehensions of prejudice can be properly mitigated by leaving such question for the arbitral
tribunal to decide, as such party can always take recourse to Section 16 of the Act, 1996 and
thereafter in appeal under Section 37, and where it is found that such party was put through the
rigmarole of arbitration proceedings vexatiously, both the tribunal and the courts, as the case may
be, should not only require that all costs of arbitration insofar as such non- signatory is concerned
be borne by the party who vexatiously impleaded it, but the arbitral tribunal would be well within its
powers to also impose costs. III. Decision of Cox and Kings (II) and Ajay Madhusudan and the scope
of Section 11 of the Act, 1996 for joinder of non-signatories to arbitration proceedings.
96. The aforesaid may be looked at from one another angle. This Court in Cox and Kings (I) (supra)
also discussed the role and scope of jurisdiction of the referral courts and arbitral tribunals under
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
76
Section(s) 11 and 16 of the Act, 1996, particularly in the context of binding a non-signatory to the
arbitration agreement. It reiterated that under Section 11, the referral court only has to determine
the prima-facie existence of an arbitration agreement. Whereas, the issue of determining parties to
an arbitration agreement is quite distinct from “existence” of the arbitration agreement, as such
issue goes to the very root of the jurisdiction competence of the arbitral tribunal, and thus,
empowered to decide the same under Section 16. Placing reliance on the decision of this Court in
Shin-Etsu Chemical Co Ltd v. Aksh Optifibre Ltd. reported in, (2005) 7 SCC 234, it held that the
referral court should not unnecessarily interfere with arbitration proceedings, and rather allow the
arbitral tribunal to exercise its primary jurisdiction for deciding such issues. The relevant
observations read as under: -
“157. When deciding the referral issue, the scope of reference under both Sections 8
and 11 is limited. Where Section 8 requires the referral court to look into the prima
facie existence of a valid arbitration agreement, Section 11 confines the court’s
jurisdiction to the existence of the examination of an arbitration agreement.
158. Section 16 of the Arbitration Act enshrines the principle of competence
competence in Indian arbitration law. The provision empowers the arbitral tribunal
to rule on its own jurisdiction, including any ruling on any objections with respect to
the existence or validity of arbitration agreement. Section 16 is an inclusive provision
which comprehends all preliminary issues touching upon the jurisdiction of the
arbitral tribunal. The doctrine of competence competence is intended to minimize
judicial intervention at the threshold stage. The issue of determining parties to an
arbitration agreement goes to the very root of the jurisdictional competence of the
arbitral tribunal.
161. The above position of law leads us to the inevitable conclusion that at the referral
stage, the court only has to determine the prima facie existence of an arbitration
agreement.
If the referral court cannot decide the issue, it should leave it to be decided by the arbitration
tribunal. unnecessarily interfere with arbitration proceedings, and rather allow the arbitral tribunal
to exercise its primary jurisdiction. In Shin-Etsu Chemical Co Ltd v. Aksh Optifibre Ltd,125 this
Court observed that there are distinct advantages to leaving the final determination on matters
pertaining to the validity of an arbitration agreement to the tribunal [...]” (Emphasis supplied)
97. Cox and Kings (I) (supra) further observed that in case of joinder of non- signatory parties to an
arbitration agreement, the referral court will be required to prima-facie rule on the existence of the
arbitration agreement and whether the non-signatory is a veritable party to the arbitration.
However, it further clarified that, due to the inherent complexity in determining whether the non-
signatory is indeed a veritable party, the referral court should leave this question for the arbitral
tribunal to decide as it can delve into the factual and circumstantial evidence along with its legal
aspects for deciding such an issue. The relevant observations read as under: -
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
77
“163. [...] Thus, when a non-signatory person or entity is arrayed as a party at Section
8 or Section 11 stage, the referral court should prima facie determine the validity or
existence of the arbitration agreement, as the case may be, and leave it for the arbitral
tribunal to decide whether the non signatory is bound by the arbitration agreement.
164. In case of joinder of non-signatory parties to an arbitration agreement, the
following two scenarios will prominently emerge:
first, where a signatory party to an arbitration agreement seeks joinder of a
non-signatory party to the arbitration agreement; and second, where a non-signatory
party itself seeks invocation of an arbitration agreement. In both the scenarios, the
referral court will be required to prima facie rule on the existence of the arbitration
agreement and whether the non-signatory is a veritable party to the arbitration
agreement. In view of the complexity of such a determination, the referral court
should leave it for the arbitral tribunal to decide whether the non signatory party is
indeed a party to the arbitration agreement on the basis of the factual evidence and
application of legal doctrine. The tribunal can delve into the factual, circumstantial,
and legal aspects of the matter to decide whether its jurisdiction extends to the
non-signatory party. In the process, the tribunal should comply with the
requirements of principles of natural justice such as giving opportunity to the
non-signatory to raise objections with regard to the jurisdiction of the arbitral
tribunal. This interpretation also gives true effect to the doctrine of competence-
competence by leaving the issue of determination of true parties to an arbitration
agreement to be decided by arbitral tribunal under Section 16.” (Emphasis supplied)
98. Thus, even if it is assumed for a moment, that the question whether a non- signatory is a
veritable party to the arbitration agreement is intrinsically connected with the issue of “existence” of
arbitration agreement, the referral courts should still nevertheless, leave such questions for the
determination of the arbitral tribunal to decide, as such an interpretation gives true effect to the
doctrine of competence-competence enshrined under Section 16 of the Act, 1996.
99. This hands-off approach of referral courts in relation to the question of whether a non-signatory
is a veritable party to the arbitration agreement or not was reiterated in Cox and Kings (II), wherein
one of us, (J.B. Pardiwala J.), observed that once an arbitral tribunal stands constituted, it becomes
automatically open to all parties to raise any preliminary objections, including preliminary
objections touching upon the jurisdiction of such tribunal, and to seek an early determination
thereof. Consequently, the issue of impleadment of a non-signatory was deliberately left for the
arbitral tribunal to decide, after taking into consideration the evidence adduced before it by the
parties and the principles enunciated under Cox and Kings (I) (supra).
100. Similarly, in Ajay Madhusudan (supra) it was held that since a detailed examination of
numerous disputed questions of fact was required for determining whether the non-signatory is a
veritable party to the arbitration agreement, the same cannot be examined in the limited jurisdiction
under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 as it would tantamount to a mini trial. Accordingly, the arbitral
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
78
tribunal was found to be the appropriate forum for deciding the said issue on the basis of the
evidence that may be adduced by the parties.
101. This approach is necessitated by the inherent complexity involved in determining whether a
non-signatory qualifies as a veritable party to the arbitration agreement, a determination that hinges
upon a multiplicity of factual aspects and demands a high threshold of satisfaction based on a
cumulative and holistic evaluation of the entire factual matrix. Such an intricate and
evidence-driven exercise makes the arbitral tribunal the most appropriate forum to adjudicate the
matter, as it possesses the institutional advantage of conducting a comprehensive scrutiny of all
evidences and materials adduced by the parties.
102. Furthermore, the legislative intent underlying Section 11 of the Act, 1996 — particularly
sub-section (6A) — is to ensure the expeditious disposal of applications for the appointment of
arbitrators. This legislative objective militates against referral courts undertaking any elaborate or
detailed factual inquiry, which would inevitably delay proceedings. Prudence thus dictates that the
referral courts confine themselves to a prima-facie examination of the existence of the arbitration
agreement and leave substantive determinations, such as the binding nature of non-signatories, to
the arbitral tribunal. An additional and equally compelling consideration is that the power exercised
by the referral courts under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 is judicial in nature. Consequently, referral
courts must refrain from embarking upon an intricate evidentiary inquiry or making final
determinations on matters that are within the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal. Any premature
adjudication or opinion by the referral court would not only usurp the tribunal’s role as the forum of
first instance for dispute resolution but could also cause irremediable prejudice. In particular, if the
referral court were to refuse impleadment of a non-signatory, there would be no statutory right of
appeal available to challenge such a refusal. In contrast, determinations made by the arbitral
tribunal — including on issues of jurisdiction and impleadment — are amenable to challenge under
Section 16 of the Act, 1996 and, thereafter, under Section 37. Accordingly, the better course of action
is for referral courts to refrain altogether from delving, into the issue of whether a non-signatory is a
veritable party to the arbitration agreement, and to leave such matters for the arbitral tribunal to
decide in the first instance.
103. At this juncture, it would be apposite to refer to the three-judge Bench decision of this Court in
Pravin Electricals Pvt Ltd v. Galaxy Infra and Engineering Pvt Ltd. reported in (2021) 5 SCC 671. In
the said decision, this Court was called upon to determine the existence of an arbitration agreement
on the basis of the documentary evidence produced by the parties. Although, this Court prima-facie
opined that there was no conclusive evidence to infer the existence of a valid arbitration agreement
between the parties, yet it referred the dispute along with the issue of existence of the arbitration
agreement to the arbitral tribunal to decide after conducting a detailed examination of documentary
evidence and cross-examination of witnesses. Thus, even where the referrals courts either find that
there is no arbitration agreement in “existence” or as a logical sequitur never embarked upon
determining such “existence”, for whatever reasons, the matter should still nevertheless be referred
to arbitration.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
79
104. It is not difficult to comprehend why the above approach, endorsed in Pravin Electricals
(supra) ought to be adopted and followed. The rationale behind this, as explained in Krish Spinning
(supra), is that there exists no right to appeal under the Act, 1996 against an order passed by the
referral court under Section 11 for either appointing or refusing to appoint an arbitrator. Any refusal
for appointment runs the risk of leaving the claimant in a situation wherein it does not have any
forum to approach for the adjudication of its claims, if it Section 11 application is rejected. However,
on the contrary, appointment of an arbitrator causes no prejudice, as all these issues can again be
espoused by leading cogent evidence and material before the arbitral tribunal under Section 16 of
the Act, 1996 and thereafter, in appeal under Section 37.
105. Cox and Kings (I) (supra) at paragraph 164, observes that in case of joinder of non-signatory
parties to an arbitration agreement, two scenarios will prominently emerge; first, where a signatory
party to an arbitration agreement seeks joinder of a non-signatory party and second, where a
non-signatory party itself seeks invocation of an arbitration agreement. It then holds that in both
scenarios the referral court (emphasis) will be required to prima facie rule on the existence of the
arbitration agreement and whether the non-signatory is a veritable party.
106. However, this by no stretch means that all issues or instances of joinder or impleadment of a
non-signatory will have to be first brought before the referral court, who in turn may leave it for the
arbitral tribunal to decide. It by no stretch precludes a scenario where the issue of joinder of a
non-signatory although never brought before the referral court, yet is later raised for the first time
before the arbitral tribunal. We say so, because the aforesaid decision of Pravin Electricals (supra)
where this Court referred the matter to the arbitral tribunal despite prima-facie opining that there is
no existence of arbitration agreement was approvingly referred to by Cox and Kings (I) (supra) to
hold that “If the referral court cannot decide the issue, it should leave it to be decided by the
arbitration tribunal”. The natural corollary to the aforesaid is that, where the referral court is either
unable to decide the issue as to whether, the non-signatory is a veritable party to the arbitration
agreement, or finds in its opinion that such non-signatory is not a veritable party, or in the extreme
alternative, had no occasion to decide such an issue, still it would be open for the arbitral tribunal to
look into the issue and decide the same.
107. The only thing the arbitral tribunal needs to be mindful of when deciding such an issue is that it
adheres to the principles of natural justice by affording the non-signatory a fair opportunity to raise
objections with regard to the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal, earnestly makes an endeavour to
determine this issue at the earliest possible stage to prevent any grave prejudice being occasioned to
such non-signatory, makes all possible efforts — whether by way of imposition of costs or through
other appropriate measures —to mitigate and deter the possibility of any abuse by the signatories
who might seek to coerce or arm twist the non-signatory by frivolously or vexatiously subjecting it to
arbitration, and lastly, that its decision is grounded in the factors and threshold requirements laid
down in Cox and Kings (I) (supra) as explained by us.
108. Moreover, one must not lose sight of the fact that, the provision of Section 11 of the Act, 1996
only comes into the picture where there has been a failure in appointment of an arbitrator. Could it
be said that where, the signatories have consensually appointed an arbitrator in terms of the
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
80
arbitration agreement, then in such cases, the arbitral tribunal that has been so constituted, would
not be empowered to implead a non-signatory as-well, merely because, the referral court did not
either determine the ‘existence of the arbitration agreement qua the non-signatory’ or did not leave
such question for determination of the arbitral tribunal, even though no such occasion had arisen
for the referral court to do so? The answer to the aforesaid, must be an emphatic “no”. Arguendo
even if one were to proceed on a stretch and rather strained construction of the law, that where a
notice of invocation is served by a party to both the signatories and the non-signatories, pursuant to
which an arbitral tribunal has been constituted consensually by the signatories, yet there would still
be a failure in appointment of an arbitrator inasmuch as the non- signatory has not agreed to
appoint and arbitrator, and the only recourse here would be to prefer to move a referral court under
Section 11 of the Act, 1996, the aforesaid contention, merits outright rejection. Not only does it
reflect a hyper-technical and overly dogmatic approach to the procedural framework of arbitration
— which is to be construed in a manner that facilitates, rather than frustrates, party autonomy and
consensual resolution — but it also fundamentally misunderstands the legislative purpose and
limited procedural function of Section 21 of the Act, 1996, which we shall now discuss, in the later
parts of this judgment.
ii. Arbitral Tribunal has the authority and power to implead Non-
Signatories to the arbitration agreement on its own accord. a. There is no inhibition in the scheme of
Act, 1996 which precludes the Arbitral Tribunal from impleading a Non-Signatory on its own
accord.
109. From the above exposition of law, it can be seen that there is nothing within the scheme of the
Act, 1996, which prohibits or restrains an arbitral tribunal from, impleading a non-signatory to the
arbitration proceedings on its own accord. So long as such impleadment is undertaken upon a
consideration of the applicable legal principles — including, but not limited to, the doctrines of
‘group of companies’, ‘alter ego’, ‘composite transaction’, and the like — the arbitral tribunal is fully
empowered to summon the non-signatory to participate in the arbitration. This autonomy stems
from the broad jurisdiction conferred upon arbitral tribunals under the Act, 1996 to rule upon their
own jurisdiction, including any objections with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration
agreement, as enshrined under Section 16. The impleadment of a non-signatory, being
fundamentally a question of jurisdiction and consent, falls squarely within the province of the
tribunal's powers, free from any statutory prohibition.
110. The aversion towards recognizing such power of the arbitral tribunal to implead a
non-signatory, that previously prevailed, had stemmed from two major misconceptions – a lack of
power being vested on the arbitral tribunal and a corresponding entrustment of this duty to implead
a non-signatory to the referral courts alone.
(i) First, the initial understanding of Chloro Controls (supra) that the legal basis for the doctrine of
‘group of companies’ and other alike principles for determining mutual consent was only under the
provisions which empowered the courts to make a reference to arbitration i.e., under Section(s) 8
and 45 of the Act, 1996, was construed to mean that only the courts have the power to resort to and
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
81
apply the aforesaid principles for determining mutual consent. Similarly, the unaltered general
definition of “party” under Section 2(1)(h) of the Act, 1996 as opposed to the wide meaning assigned
to the term “party” under Section(s) 8 and 45 of the Act, 1996, was misconstrued as a positive
indicium that an arbitral tribunal lacks the power to implead a non-signatory as the scope and
exercise of its jurisdiction is confined to the narrow meaning of “party” under Section 2(1)(h) i.e.,
only signatories or those specifically referred to arbitration, whereas the power and jurisdictional
reach of the courts extends to the wider meaning of “party” i.e., “a party to an arbitration agreement
or any person claiming through or under him” under Section(s) 8 and 45 of the Act, 1996 i.e., it
extends to even non- signatories.
(ii) Secondly, the position of law which existed at the time of Chloro Controls (supra), required the
referral courts to make a determination of all issues fundamental to making a reference to
arbitration including the issue whether a non-signatory could be said to be bound by the arbitration
agreement. Since this primary duty of identifying and then in turn impleading a non-signatory who
is bound by the arbitration agreement was cast upon the courts, it was presumed that the arbitral
tribunal even if empowered is incapable or incompetent to undertake this task, as otherwise it would
tantamount to usurping the jurisdiction of the referral courts.
111. Thus, the combined effect of the aforesaid was that an arbitral tribunal could not, on its own
accord, resort to or apply the various principles for determining mutual consent, and thereby
implead a non-signatory since both (i) the power to do so was presumed lie within the exclusive
domain and jurisdiction as- well as the (ii) the corresponding duty to undertake this exercise was
understood to have been entrusted solely to the referral courts.
112. However, with the advent of Cox and Kings (I) (supra), the legal foundation for the application
of the ‘Group of Companies’ doctrine, or any analogous principles designed to determine mutual
consent was clarified to exist in the definition of "party" under Section 2(1)(h) read with the
meaning of “arbitration agreement” under Section 7 of the Act, 1996. Unlike Section(s) 8 and 45 of
the Act, 1996, the provisions of Section(s) 2(1)(h) and 7 are not confined in their applicability to only
judicial forums or courts, and rather extend equally to both courts and arbitral tribunals, as these
provisions form the bedrock of the framework of arbitration under the Act, 1996. The logical
sequitur of this is that arbitral tribunals, too, are vested with the requisite authority to engage with
and apply principles, such as the 'Group of Companies' doctrine, when determining whether a
non-signatory may be bound by an arbitration agreement.
113. It is well within the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal to decide the issue of joinder and
non-joinder of parties and to assess the applicability of the Group of Companies Doctrine. Neither in
Cox and Kings (I) (supra) nor in Ajay Madhusudhan (supra), this Court has said that it is only the
reference courts that are empowered to determine whether a non-signatory should be referred to
arbitration. The law which has developed over a period of time is that both ‘courts and tribunals’ are
fully empowered to decide the issues of impleadment of a non-signatory and Arbitral Tribunals have
been held to be preferred forum for the adjudication of the same.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
82
114. In the case of Ajay Madhusudhan (supra), this Court, placing reliance on Cox and Kings (I)
(supra), has expressly held that Section 16 is an inclusive provision which comprehends all
preliminary issues touching upon the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal and the issue of
determining parties to an arbitration agreement goes to the very root of the jurisdictional
competence of the arbitral tribunal.
115. The case of Ajay Madhusudhan (supra) also recognizes that the legal relationship between the
signatory and non-signatory assumes significance in determining whether the non-signatory can be
taken to be bound by the Arbitration Agreement. This Court also issued a caveat that the ‘courts and
tribunals should not adopt a conservative approach to exclude all persons or entities who are
otherwise bound by the underlying contract containing the arbitration agreement through their
conduct and their relationship with the signatory parties. The mutual intent of the parties,
relationship of a non- signatory with a signatory, commonality of the subject matter, the composite
nature of the transactions and performance of the contract are all factors that signify the intention of
the non-signatory to be bound by the arbitration agreement’.
116. Recently, a coordinate bench of this Court in Adavya Projects Pvt. Ltd. v. M/s Vishal Strcturals
Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. reported in 2025 INSC 507, also held that an arbitral tribunal under Section 16 of
the Act, 1996 has the power to implead the parties to an arbitration agreement, irrespective of
whether they are signatories or non-signatories, to the arbitration proceedings. This Court speaking
through P.S. Narasimha J. observed that since an arbitral tribunal’s jurisdiction is derived from the
consent of the parties to refer their disputes to arbitration, any person or entity who is found to be a
party to the arbitration agreement can be made a part of the arbitral proceedings, and the tribunal
can exercise jurisdiction over him. Section 16 of the Act, 1996 which empowers the arbitral tribunal
to determine its own jurisdiction, is an inclusive provision that covers all jurisdiction question
including the determination of who is a party to the arbitration agreement, and thus, such a
question would be one which falls within the domain of the arbitral tribunal. It further observed
that, although most national legislations do not expressly provide for joinder of parties by the
arbitral tribunal, yet an arbitral tribunal can direct the joinder of a person or entity, even if no such
provision exists in the statute, as long as such person or entity is a party to the arbitration
agreement. Accordingly, this Court held that since the respondents therein were parties to the
underlying contract and the arbitration agreement, the arbitral tribunal would have the power to
implead them as parties to the arbitration proceedings in exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 16
of the Act, 1996. The relevant observations read as under: -
“24. As briefly stated above, the determination of who is a party to the arbitration
agreement falls within the domain of the arbitral tribunal as per Section 16 of the
ACA. Section 16 embodies the doctrine of kompetenz-kompetenz, i.e., that the
arbitral tribunal can determine its own jurisdiction. The provision is inclusive and
covers all jurisdictional questions, including the existence and validity of the
arbitration agreement, who is a party to the arbitration agreement, and the scope of
disputes referrable to arbitration under the agreement. Considering that the arbitral
tribunal’s power to make an award that binds the parties is derived from the
arbitration agreement, these jurisdictional issues must necessarily be decided
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
83
through an interpretation of the arbitration agreement itself. Therefore, the arbitral
tribunal’s jurisdiction must be determined against the touchstone of the arbitration
agreement.
25. This view finds support in the jurisprudence and practice of international
commercial arbitration. It is notable that while most national legislations do not
expressly provide for joinder of parties by the arbitral tribunal, this must be done
with the consent of all the parties. Gary Born has taken the view that the arbitral
tribunal can direct the joinder of parties when the arbitration agreement expressly
provides for the same. However, he states that in reality, most arbitration
agreements, whether ad hoc or providing for institutional arbitration, neither
expressly preclude nor expressly permit the arbitral tribunal to join parties. In such
cases, the power must be implied,25 particularly when there is a multi-party
arbitration clause in the same underlying contract that does not expressly address the
joinder of parties in the arbitral proceedings. He states that: “In these circumstances,
there is a substantial argument that the parties have impliedly accepted the
possibility of consolidating arbitrations under their multi-party arbitration
agreement and/or the joinder or intervention of other contracting parties into such
arbitrations… the parties’ joint acceptance of a single dispute resolution mechanism,
to deal with disputes under a single contractual relationship, reflects their agreement
on the possibility of a unified proceeding to resolve their disputes, rather than
necessarily requiring fragmented proceedings in all cases.” Further, in jurisdictions
where there is no provision in the national arbitration statute authorising the courts
to consolidate arbitrations or to join parties, it is left to the arbitral tribunal to
determine this issue at the first instance.
26. Therefore, as per the legal principles under the ACA as well as in international
commercial arbitration, it is a foundational tenet that the arbitral tribunal’s
jurisdiction is derived from the consent of the parties to refer their disputes to
arbitration, which must be recorded in an arbitration agreement. The proper judicial
inquiry to decide a jurisdictional issue under Section 16 as to whether a person/entity
can be made a party to the arbitral proceedings will therefore entail an examination
of the arbitration agreement and whether such person is a party to it. If the answer is
in the affirmative, such person can be made party to the arbitral proceedings and the
arbitral tribunal can exercise jurisdiction over him as he has consented to the same.
39. [...] Since they are parties to the underlying contract and the arbitration
agreement, the arbitral tribunal has the power to implead them as parties to the
arbitration proceedings while exercising its jurisdiction under Section 16 of the ACA
and as per the kompetenz-kompetenz principle.” (Emphasis supplied)
117. As observed in Adavya Projects (supra), Gary Born in his seminal work; the International
Commercial Arbitration, Vol 2 (3rd edn, Kluwer Law International 2021) as held that consolidation
and joinder/intervention may be ordered by an arbitral tribunal, arbitral institution, as long as the
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
84
same is pursuant to parties (unanimous) agreement thereto. He has observed that “In almost all
cases, the approach taken by national law is that consolidation and joinder/intervention may be
ordered by an arbitral tribunal, arbitral institution, or a national court, but only pursuant to the
parties’ (unanimous) agreement thereto. If the parties have not so agreed, both the tribunal and
local courts will lack the authority under national law to order either consolidation or
joinder/intervention.” Since the aspect of joinder of a party to the arbitration agreement, either
signatory or non-signatory stems from a conjoint reading of Section(s) 2(1)(h) and 7 of the Act, 1996
as explained by Cox and Kings (I) (supra) and by us in the foregoing paragraphs, even if the parties
are to agree that a tribunal or for that matter a referral court will not have the power to implead any
party to the arbitration proceeding, such an agreement will only operate to the extent that (i) the
arbitration agreement is not governed by the Act, 1996 i.e., does not fall under Part I of the Act, 1996
and (ii) that such party is not otherwise bound by the arbitration agreement. This is because such an
agreement is an agreement in respect of the rules of procedure of the arbitration, and as per Section
19 of the Act, 1996, more particularly sub-section (2), any such agreement is subject to Part I i.e., the
parties are free to agree on the procedure to be followed by the arbitral insofar as it is not
inconsistent with Part I. Since, the legal basis for the joinder or impleadment of any party who is
bound by the arbitration agreement originates from the substantive provisions of the Act, 1996 i.e.,
Section(s) 2(1)(h) and 7, respectively, the parties cannot denude the arbitral tribunal of such power
in terms of the non-obstante clause of Section 19(2) of the Act, 1996. Gary Born, further observes
that “this approach is consistent with that prescribed by the New York Convention and with the
general respect for the parties’ procedural autonomy in international arbitration”. Thus, it
acknowledges, that such stipulation as to consolidation or joinder is purely within the realm of
procedural autonomy, hence Section 19 of the Act, 1996 which is the source of procedural autonomy
will be subject to the conditions stipulated therein.
118. Further, it is true that the entire scheme of Act, 1996 is silent on the power of a court or arbitral
tribunal to join or implead a party to the arbitration proceedings. Gary Born argues, that “In the
absence of specific statutory provisions, the topics of consolidation and joinder/intervention are
generally subject to the Model Law’s basic requirement that arbitration agreements be recognized
and enforced in accordance with the parties’ intentions. That is, consolidation and
joinder/intervention should be both permitted and required – as an element of the parties’
agreement to arbitrate” The UNCITRAL Model Law being the genesis of the Act, 1996, even if there
is no explicit statutory provision recognizing such power of impleadment, it nevertheless should not
only be permitted but also required, as long as it is exercised within the confines of the intention of
the parties and the scope of arbitration agreement, which is exactly what has also been laid down in
so many words by Cox and Kings (I) (supra).
119. He says that, more often than not arbitration agreements, particularly for ad hoc arbitration
“will neither expressly preclude nor expressly authorize consolidation”. But, “there is no reason,
however, that an agreement authorizing (or forbidding) consolidation or joinder/intervention
cannot be implied ... various aspects of an arbitration agreement are routinely implied (such as
confidentiality, a tribunal’s power to order provisional relief or disclosure, the choice of applicable
law and the like”. He accordingly, advocates that “The same approach can, and indeed must, be
taken to questions of consolidation and joinder/intervention” where the “questions of implied
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
85
agreement to consolidation and joinder/intervention depend in substantial part on the structure of
the parties’ contractual relations and the terms of their agreements to arbitrate”.
120. Thus, the natural corollary to the aforesaid is that even in the absence of any express statutory
provision, such power exists impliedly. In this regard, we may profitably refer to the recent five
Judge-Bench decision of this Court in Gayatri Balasamy v. M/s ISG Novasoft Technologies Ltd.
reported in 2025 INSC 605, wherein this Court recognized the applicability of the doctrine of
‘implied power’ to the Act, 1996, in the context of Section 34. The majority opinion held that, the
doctrine of implied power may be read into the Act, 1996 for the purpose of effectuating and
advancing its object and to avoid hardship. The relevant observations read as under: -
“The doctrine of implied power is to only effectuate and advance the object of the
legislation, i.e., the 1996 Act and to avoid the hardship. It would, therefore, be wrong
to say that the view expressed by us falls foul of express provisions of the 1996 Act.”
121. K.V. Vishwanathn J. in his dissenting opinion in Gayatri Balasamy (supra) observed that if a
statute confers a power and circumscribes its exercise on certain conditions, any power which is
inconsistent with those express conditions cannot be implied. He observed that the doctrine of
implied powers is invoked to effectuate the final power, where it is impossible to effectuate the final
power for doing something which although not provided in express terms but nevertheless is
required to be done. In such scenarios, the power by virtue of the doctrine of implied powers will be
supplied as a necessary intendment of the legislation, to advance its object and avoid grave
hardship. The relevant observations read as under: -
“100. Undeterred, an attempt was made to fall back upon the doctrine of implied
powers to somehow vest in Section 34 Court a power to modify the award. It is well
settled that if a statute conferring a power to be exercised on certain conditions, the
conditions prescribed are normally held to be mandatory and a power inconsistent
with those conditions is impliedly negatived. No doubt, there is a principle in law that
a Court must as far as possible adopt a construction which effectuates the legislative
intent and purpose and that an express grant of a statutory power carries with it by
necessary implication the authority to use all reasonable means to make such grant
effective.
xxx xxx xxx
102. As is clear, the doctrine of implied powers is invoked to effectuate the final
power. Where it is impossible to effectuate the final power unless something not
authorized in express terms be also done, in such an event, the power will be supplied
by necessary intendment as an exception. The exceptional situation is to advance the
object of the legislation under consideration and to avoid grave hardship.”
122. Reliance was also placed on the decision of Savitri v. Govind Singh Rawat, reported in (1985) 4
SCC 337, wherein it was held that “Whenever anything is required to be done by law and it is found
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
86
impossible to do that thing unless something not authorised in express terms be also done then that
something else will be supplied by necessary intendment. Such a construction though it may not
always be admissible in the present case however would advance the object of the legislation under
consideration. A contrary view is likely to result in grave hardship to the applicant, who may have no
means passed to subsist until the final order is passed.” It further, observed that “Every court must
be deemed to possess by necessary intendment all such powers as are necessary to make its orders
effective. This principle is embodied in the maxim "ubi aliquid conceditur, conceditur et id sine quo
res ipsa esse non potest" (Where anything is conceded, there is conceded also anything without
which the thing itself cannot exist)”.
123. What can be discerned from the above is that the recourse to doctrine of implied powers would
be permissible, if without it, it is impossible to effectuate a final power, and such exercise of implied
power would effectuate and advance the object of the legislation.
124. Cox and Kings (I) (supra) has elaborately acknowledged the unique complexities posed by
contemporary business transactions to the traditional framework of arbitration. Historically,
arbitration gained prominence in the context of straightforward and linear bilateral transactions
under the mercantile system of law. While over the past century, the nature of modern commercial
transactions has undergone a profound transformation with the involvement of multifaceted
obligations between multiple parties and complex contractual structures more sophisticated than
the linear parent‰ subsidiary type of organization, that has rendered the traditional dyadic
paradigms of business obsolete, particularly in areas such as construction contracts, financing
transactions, reinsurance contracts, the framework of arbitration has, to a significant extent
remained unchanged, leading to a mismatch between procedural form and commercial substance.
125. For arbitration to remain a viable and effectively alternative mechanism for dispute resolution,
it is imperative to ensure that commercial reality does not outgrow this mechanism. The
mechanisms of arbitration must be sufficiently elastic to accommodate the complexities of
multi-party and multi-contract arrangements without compromising foundational principles such
as consent and party autonomy. The approach of courts and arbitral tribunal in particular must be
responsive to the emerging commercial practices and expectations of the parties who submit
themselves to it.
126. It was in this backdrop and the emerging best international practices that Cox and Kings (I)
(supra) recognized the applicability of the ‘Group of Companies’ doctrine and other principles of
determining mutual consent, to bind even non-signatories to the arbitration agreement as parties,
as long as they were a veritable party and found to have impliedly consented to such agreement. The
legal basis of these principles were traced to not only the object of the Act, 1996, but to the
substantive provisions of Section(s) 2(1)(h) and 7 thereto. However, mere recognition of this
principles which ultimately seeks to make the Indian arbitration law more responsive to the
contemporary requirements, would be a farce, if the power to actually effectuate such principles, is
not recognized, merely due to the absence of any explicit provision in this regard. We are of the
considered opinion, that recognition of the power of joinder or impleadment of a non-signatory by
an arbitral tribunal is a necessary intendment of the express provisions of Section(s) 2(1)(h) and 7
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
87
and the overall scheme and object of the Act, 1996 as well as the fundamental cannons of the law of
arbitration of providing an effective alternative dispute resolution mechanism.
127. Thus, even in the absence of an express provisions in the Act, 1996 empowering the arbitral
tribunal to implead or join a party who is otherwise bound by the arbitration agreement, the arbitral
tribunal does possess such power by virtue of the doctrine of implied powers, as long as the same is
in tandem with the scheme of Act, 1996 i.e., as long as the parties had either expressly or impliedly
consented to the arbitration agreement as held in Cox and Kings (I) (supra).
b. Doctrine of Kompetenz-Kompetenz and the Jurisdictional Reach of an Arbitral Tribunal.
128. The aforesaid may be looked at from one another angle, through the ‘Always Speaking’
statutory interpretation rule. The said rule dictates that the words of a statute should be treated as
ambulatory, speaking continuously in the present and conveying a contemporary meaning. This
approach entails that if things not known or understood at the time when the enactment came into
force, fall, on a fair construction, within its words, those things should be held to be included or
intended by the statute. It lays that the context or application of a statutory expression may change
over time, but the meaning of the expression itself cannot change’. It therefore provides for a statute
to be applied to new circumstances and developments without the need for legislative revision or
amendment. In other words, the core meaning of a statute is fixed but its context or application may
change which is inherently capable of ‘embracing future changes in the subject matter.
129. Historically, the rule of interpretation of statutes, was premised on the understanding that
statutes were to be construed in accordance with their natural meaning as at the date of their
enactment. It was based on the Latin maxim “contemporanea expositio est optima et fortissima in
lege” which means “Contemporary exposition is the best and strongest in law”. However, over time
the courts started recognizing the problems underlying this orthodoxic rule of interpretation. Sir
Peter Benson Maxwell, On the Interpretation of Statutes, ed Frederick Stroud (Sweet and Maxwell,
5th ed, 1912) explained that the use of “contemporanea expositio est optima et fortissima in lege” for
interpretation of statutes had largely been abandoned except perhaps in the construction of
ambiguous language used in very old statutes where the language itself may have had a rather
different meaning.
130. The modern approach to statutory interpretation insists that the context be considered in the
first instance, not merely at some later stage when ambiguity might be thought to arise, and include
such things as the existing state of the law and the mischief which, by legitimate means such as
reference to reports of law reform bodies, one may discern the statute was intended to remedy.
131. If close consideration of a statutory text in its wider context and by reference to its purpose
establishes that Parliament has deliberately chosen words to provide for its application to new
circumstances and developments then the application of the ‘always speaking’ approach is judicially
required. The interpretive process with the ‘always speaking’ approach is, in essence, to put the cart
before the horse.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
88
132. Section 16 of the Act, 1996, which enshrines the principle of “kompetenz-
kompetenz” could be said to be one such provision when seen in light of the object of the Act, 1996,
which requires the courts to adopt a pragmatic and ‘always speaking’ approach in its interpretation.
133. Section 16 of the Act, 1996 empowers the arbitral tribunal to rule on its own jurisdiction. The
policy rationale underlying this provision is twofold: first, to respect and uphold the intention of the
parties to resolve their disputes through arbitration by empowering the forum they have
contractually chosen; and second, to prevent a fragmentation of proceedings through premature
judicial intervention, which can frustrate the efficacy of arbitration by causing delays and fostering
multiplicity of litigation.
134. The negative aspect of competence-competence is aimed at restricting the interference of the
courts at the referral stage by preventing the courts from examining the issues pertaining to the
jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal before the arbitral tribunal itself has had the opportunity to
entertain them AND to also enable the arbitral tribunal to exercise necessary powers without any
dependency upon the national courts, with the courts taking a back-seat and being permitted to
review the exercise of power of the arbitral tribunal and its decision at a later stage.
135. The legislative choice of the word “rule” in Section 16 is both deliberate and significant. It does
not merely suggest that the arbitral tribunal is competent to “consider” or “review” questions of its
jurisdiction, but rather that it is vested with the authority to decisively adjudicate and pronounce
upon such issues. It connotes that the arbitral tribunal is not only competent to entertain
jurisdictional questions, but also capable — in terms of procedural and substantive mandate — to
exercise necessary power for effectually issuing binding rulings thereon during the course of the
proceedings. It endows the tribunal with the necessary powers to formulate its ruling. It illustrates
the intention of the legislature to endow the arbitral tribunal with all powers and jurisdictional reach
for effectively deciding its jurisdiction, even where no challenge is made by either parties, and to
exercise the necessary powers for making such rulings.
136. Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration (5th edn, Oxford University Press 2009), have
observed that an arbitral tribunal’s jurisdiction is derived “from the will of the parties to the
arbitration agreement and therefore joinder or intervention is generally only possible with the
consent of all parties concerned” and “such consent may be either express, implied, or by reference
to a particular set of arbitration rules agreed to by the parties that provide for joinder” However,
“unlike litigation in state courts, in which third parties can often be joined to proceedings, the
jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal to allow for the joinder or intervention of third parties to an
arbitration is limited” to the arbitration agreement and parties bound by it.
137. Adavya Projects (supra) has observed that Section 16 of the Act, 1996 is inclusive and covers all
jurisdictional questions, including the existence and validity of the arbitration agreement, who is a
party to the arbitration agreement, and the scope of disputes referrable to arbitration under the
agreement and thus, the arbitral tribunal’s jurisdiction must also be determined against the
touchstone of the arbitration agreement.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
89
138. It is often loosely said that an arbitral tribunal does not have any jurisdiction except what has
been conferred by the parties. While the same may on the surface be correct, however much
significance of an arbitral tribunal's jurisdiction often finds itself lost and obscured due to the
semantics of the above statement. The misconception arises when the acts of party is conflated with
the source of legal authority.
139. The present case is a classic textbook example of this misconception. What has ben argued by
the appellants herein in so many words, is that since it was never a party to the proceedings under
Section 11 of the Act, 1996 before the referral court, and the arbitral tribunal was constituted by the
referral court without arraying the appellant herein, the arbitral tribunal had no jurisdiction later to
implead it. The crux of this argument is that, the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal is only confined
to the act of the parties and the manner in which the referral court, had constituted the arbitral
tribunal. It stems from a failure to appreciate that while the parties' conduct may set in motion the
arbitral process, it is not the determinant of the arbitral tribunal’s jurisdiction in a legal sense.
Rather, it is the arbitration agreement itself—once validly concluded—that creates the jurisdictional
foundation upon which the arbitral edifice rests.
140. It erroneously presumes that jurisdiction is derived solely from the act of appointment rather
than from the arbitration agreement that preceded and necessitated such appointment. The
arbitration agreement, not the referral court’s order nor the procedural formalities attendant to the
tribunal’s constitution, is the true source of jurisdiction. The act of the referral court in constituting
the arbitral tribunal is but an enabling mechanism to activate a tribunal whose jurisdiction was
already latent in the arbitration agreement itself. This Court in M/s Arif Azim Co. Ltd. v. M/s
Micromax Informatics Fze, wherein, one of us (J.B. Pardiwala J.) had had held that referral courts
are only a conduit or means to arbitration, and the sum and substance of the arbitration has to be
derived from the choices of the parties and their intentions contained in the arbitration agreement.
141. The jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal is not created by the mere subjective intent or volition of
the parties. Rather, it is the arbitration agreement—a legally cognisable and objective
instrument—that operates as the foundational source of jurisdiction in the eyes of the law. Just as
the creation of a property automatically vests jurisdiction in the territorial courts competent to
adjudicate over such property, the conclusion of an arbitration agreement ipso jure brings into
existence the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal. This jurisdiction exists in a de jure sense from the
moment the arbitration agreement is validly executed, regardless of whether the tribunal has been
formally constituted.
142. In other words, it is not the tribunal’s subsequent constitution through procedural steps —
whether by the parties themselves or by the intervention of a court under Section 11 of the Act, 1996
— that bestows jurisdiction upon it. Rather, such procedural mechanisms merely activate or
operationalise a jurisdiction that is already in existence by virtue of the arbitration agreement. The
arbitral tribunal, upon being constituted, steps into an already established legal framework of
jurisdiction, rooted in the consensual and binding nature of the arbitration agreement. The arbitral
tribunal is not a creature of mere procedural will but of substantive legal consequence flowing from
the arbitration agreement. To hold otherwise would be to invert the fundamental cannons of law of
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
90
arbitration which treats the arbitration agreement as the cornerstone of arbitral competence.
143. It was in this background, that Adavya Projects (supra) held, and rightly so, that the jurisdiction
of the arbitral tribunal to implead a person depends on whether such person is a party to the
arbitration agreement. c. Requirement of Notice of Invocation under Section 21 of the Act, 1996.
144. At this juncture, it would apposite to explain the modalities for the exercise of such power of
joinder / impleadment by an arbitral tribunal. The appellant herein has vehemently contended that
even if it is assumed that it is bound by the arbitration agreement, the impugned order is
nevertheless liable to be set- aside, inasmuch as the appellant herein has been improperly arrayed as
a party to the arbitration solely on the basis of a separate statement of claim / counter- claim filed by
respondent no. 1, without the issuance of any notice of invocation as mandated under Section 21 of
the Act, 1996. It was argued that once the arbitral tribunal had been constituted for the dispute
between the respondent no. 1 and 3 herein, if at all the respondent no. 1 was of the opinion that the
appellant herein was bound by the arbitration agreement, it ought to have impleaded it by initiating
an independent, fresh arbitration proceedings by first issuing a notice under Section 21 of the Act,
1996, and only thereafter filing a statement of claim against the appellants herein, rather than
proceeding to implead it directly on the basis of a purported statement of claim in the arbitration
proceedings that had been originally commenced solely between BCSPL and SPCL, i.e., respondent
nos. 1 and 3 respectively, with no prior or contemporaneous invocation or commencement of
arbitration viz-à-viz the appellant. According to the appellant, this approach not only contravenes
the procedural mandate of the Act, 1996, more particularly, the purpose of Section 21 but also
undermines the principles of natural justice and party consent, which lie at the heart of consensual
arbitration.
145. The marginal note appended to Section 21 of the Act, 1996 makes it abundantly clear, that the
notice to be issued thereunder is for the purpose of “commencement of arbitration proceedings”.
The substantive provision further makes it clear that, the date on which a request / notice of
invocation for referring a dispute is received by the respondent, would the date on which the arbitral
proceedings in respect of a particular dispute commences. The words “particular dispute” assumes
significance in the interpretation of this provision and its underlying object. It indicates that the
provision is concerned only with determining when arbitration is deemed to have commenced for
the specific dispute mentioned in the notice. The language in which the said provision is couched is
neither prohibitive or exhaustive insofar as reference of any other disputes which although not
specified in the notice of invocation yet, nonetheless falls within the scope of the arbitration
agreement. The term “particular dispute”, does not mean all disputes, nor does it confine the
jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal which is said to be one emanating from the ‘arbitration
agreement’ to only those disputes mentioned in the notice of invocation, as it would tantamount to
reading a restriction into the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal to the bounds of the notice of
invocation instead of the arbitration agreement. Thus, there is no inhibition under Section 21 of the
Act, 1996 for raising any other dispute or claim which is covered under the arbitration agreement in
the absence of any such notice. Section 21 is procedural rather than jurisdictional — it does not serve
to create or validate the arbitration agreement itself, nor is it a precondition for the existence of the
tribunal's jurisdiction, but merely operates as a statutory mechanism to ascertain the date of
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
91
initiation for reckoning limitation.
146. The aforesaid is further fortified from the distinct manner in which the scheme of the Act, 1996
treats and refers to a ‘notice of invocation’ under Section 21 and the subsequent filing of a ‘statement
of claim’ or ‘counter-claim’ under the Section 23. Section 23 of the Act, 1996 reads as under: -
23. Statements of claim and defence.— (1) Within the period of time agreed upon by
the parties or determined by the arbitral tribunal, the claimant shall state the facts
supporting his claim, the points at issue and the relief or remedy sought, and the
respondent shall state his defence in respect of these particulars, unless the parties
have otherwise agreed as to the required elements of those statements.
(2) The parties may submit with their statements all documents they consider to be relevant or may
add a reference to the documents or other evidence they will submit.
(2A) The respondent, in support of his case, may also submit a counterclaim or plead a set-off,
which shall be adjudicated upon by the arbitral tribunal, if such counterclaim or set-off falls within
the scope of the arbitration agreement.
(3) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, either party may amend or supplement his claim or
defence during the course of the arbitral proceedings, unless the arbitral tribunal considers it
inappropriate to allow the amendment or supplement having regard to the delay in making it.
(4) The statement of claim and defence under this section shall be completed within a period of six
months from the date the arbitrator or all the arbitrators, as the case may be, received notice, in
writing of their appointment.
147. Section 23 sub-section (1) places an obligation upon the claimant to state the facts supporting
his “claim”, the points at issue and the relief or remedy sought by way of its statement of claim,
before the arbitral tribunal. Notably, the legislature, in the first part of the said sub-section, has
deliberately and consciously used the term “claim” as opposed to “particular dispute” employed in
Section 21 of the Act, 1996. Although, it could said that the term “particular dispute” under Section
21 connotes a larger umbrella within which the term “claim” under Section 23 would be subsumed,
thereby suggesting that there is no scope to deviate from what was sought to be referred by the
notice of invocation, we do not think so. We say so because, the requirement for providing the points
at issue and the relief or remedy sought that exists in sub-section (1) of Section 23 of the Act, 1996 is
patently absent in Section 21 of the Act, 1996, which clearly shows that the scope and object of these
two provisions are at variance to each other. Further this, sub-section does not stipulate either
explicitly or implicitly, that such “claim” must be the same or in tandem with the “particular
dispute” in respect of which the notice of invocation was issued under Section 21 of the Act, 1996.
This distinction in terminology is neither incidental nor redundant; rather, it reflects a conscious
legislative design to demarcate the procedural objective of Section 21 from the substantive function
served by Section 23. Unlike Section 23, Section 21 does not require any articulation of the relief
sought or the framing of issues —its sole purpose is to indicate when arbitration is deemed to have
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
92
commenced, for the limited purpose of computing the limitation period.
148. This is further fortified from the fact that nowhere does the Act, 1996 lay down any specific
format or form of notice under Section 21 of the Act, 1996, or any strict requirement of the contents
to be stipulated therein. This was noticed by this Court in Milkfood Ltd. v. GMC Ice Cream (P) Ltd.
reported in (2004) 7 SCC 288, wherein it was held that Section 21 of the Act, 1995 must be
construed in tune with its analogous counter-part provisions of Article 21 of the UNCITRAL Model
Law read with Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and Section 14 of the English
Arbitration Act, 1996 wherein at least the form of notice and strict adherence thereto has become
redundant due to the absence of any specific form or requirement of such notice. The relevant
observations read as under: -
“69. The UNCITRAL Model Rules of Arbitration vis-à-vis provision of Section 14 of
the English Arbitration Act, 1996 must be construed having regard to the decisions of
the English courts as also this Court which addressed the form of notice to be given in
order to commence the arbitration for the purpose of Section 34(3) of the Limitation
Act. By reason of Section 14, merely the form of notice and strict adherence thereto
has become redundant, as now in terms of Section 14 of the Arbitration Act there is
otherwise no specific requirement as to the form of notice subject to any contract
operating in the field. (See paras 5-020, 5-027 and 5-028 of Russell on Arbitration,
22nd Edn.) Section 21 of the 1996 Act must be construed accordingly. It defines the
moment of the commencement of arbitral proceedings. [...]”
149. Similarly, sub-section (2) of Section 23, which enables the respondent to make a
counter-claim or plead set-off, does not envisage any requirement that such
counter-claim or set-off must be in respect of or correspond to the “particular
dispute” in terms of Section 21 of the Act, 1996, thus, suggesting the legislature’s
intention to give a wide import to the term “claim” and by extension “counter-claim”.
In order to further obviate any confusion in respect of what claims can be raised,
Section 23 sub-section (3) goes one step ahead and stipulates that, unless agreed
otherwise by the parties, any party may amend or supplement its “claim” during the
course of the arbitral proceedings, and further, that such amendment or supplement
may be rejected only if the arbitral tribunal considers it inappropriate for one and
only one reason, that being, the delay in making or seeking such amendment or
supplement. What can be discerned from the above is that there is no restriction
whatsoever, in the plain words of Section 23 of the Act, 1996, which would be
indicative of an inhibition in raising those claims or counter-claims etc., that have no
bearing with the notice of invocation under Section 21 of the Act, 1996.
150. The language used in Section 23 of the Act, 1996 makes no reference whatsoever,
either explicitly to the provision of Section 21 or the particular words used
thereunder, that would be suggestive of any correlation between the two provisions.
On the contrary, the singular ground that has been mentioned in Section 23
sub-section (3) upon which an amendment or supplement of claim may be rejected
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
93
by the arbitral tribunal i.e., if it is deemed inappropriate due to delay, is a positive
indicium that that no restriction can be read into the scope of claims that may be
raised in the statement of claim or counter-claim beyond what was stipulated in the
notice of invocation under Section 21 of the Act, 1996. Any limitation or restriction on
the scope of a statement of claim or a counter-claim as the case may be, has to be
understood not from the provision of Section 21 but only from the explicit language
used in Section 23 of the Act, 1996.
151. Any restriction on the nature or content of claims, counter-claims, or set-offs in
arbitration must be sourced solely from the express language of Section 23 and not
from Section 21. Section(s) 21 and 23 of the Act, 1996 although overlap in some
aspects with each other in terms of the claims that would ordinarily be referred to the
tribunal more often than not tend to coincide, yet they are by no means tethered
together in such a manner that neither of them can survive without one another. The
latter serves only a procedural function and does not condition or limit the tribunal’s
jurisdiction to adjudicate claims that may not have been specifically invoked at the
threshold stage. To read such a limitation into the statutory scheme would run
contrary to both the text and the object of the Act.
152. In Milkfood (supra) this Court was called upon the examine the object
underlying Section 21 of the Act, 1996. This Court after a comprehensive examination
of a catena of decisions, both under the English Law and pertaining to the Act, 1996,
held that the purpose of a notice under Section 21 of the Act, 1996 is for the
applicability of the provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 in terms of Section 43 of the
Act, 1996 to the claims sought to be referred to arbitration and when can an
appointment of an arbitrator be sought in terms of Section 11 of the Act, 1996. It
explained that the date when arbitration proceeding commences would be relevant
for the purpose of attracting the Limitation Act, 1963 or for the purpose of time bar
clauses or for the rules applicable in terms of the arbitration agreement, such as for
setting into motion the conflict of laws when the proper law of the contract is one law
and the law of the arbitral procedure is another. Lastly, that this “commencement of
arbitration proceeding” by Section 21 of the Act, 1996 would also be relevant for of
applicability of the 1940 Act having regard to Section 85(2)(a). Apart from the
aforesaid, no other relevancy of Section 21 of the Act, 1996 was laid down by this
Court, much less for the purposes of Section 23 thereunder. The relevant
observations read as under: -
“26. The commencement of an arbitration proceeding for the purpose of applicability
of the provisions of the Indian Limitation Act is of great significance. Even Section
43(1) of the 1996 Act provides that the Limitation Act, 1963 shall apply to the
arbitration as it applies to proceedings in court. Sub-section (2) thereof provides that
for the purpose of the said section and the Limitation Act, 1963, an arbitration shall
be deemed to have commenced on the date referred to in Section 21.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
94
29. For the purpose of the Limitation Act an arbitration is deemed to have
commenced when one party to the arbitration agreement serves on the other a notice
requiring the appointment of an arbitrator. This indeed is relatable to the other
purposes also, as, for example, see Section 29(2) of (English) Arbitration Act, 1950.
30. The date when arbitration proceeding commences would depend upon various
factors and the purposes which it seeks to achieve. It may be for the purpose of
attracting the Limitation Act or for the purpose of time bar clauses or for the rules
applicable therefor, as, for example, the rules of the International Chamber of
Commerce.
31. The date of commencement of an arbitration also affects the position under the
conflict of laws when the proper law of the contract is one law and the law of the
arbitral procedure is another, for then, up to the date of commencement of the
arbitration proceeding, the law of the contract must govern, and the law of the
procedure will only govern thereafter. [...]
32. Sections 14(3) and (5) of the (English) Arbitration Act, 1996 would also show that
commencement of arbitral proceeding is not only for the purpose of limitation but
also for the purpose of considering a case when the parties by their contract agree
that the arbitration must be commenced within a specified time, failing which the
right to arbitration, or indeed the claim itself, is apt to be barred. Determination of
time elements in an arbitration is provided for in Section 21 of the 1996 Act clearly
indicating as to when such arbitration has officially begun.
72. Keeping in view the fact that in all the decisions, referred to hereinbefore, this
Court has applied the meaning given to the expression “commencement of the
arbitral proceeding” as contained in Section 21 of the 1996 Act for the purpose of
applicability of the 1940 Act having regard to Section 85(2)(a) thereof, we have no
hesitation in holding that in this case also, service of a notice for appointment of an
arbitrator would be the relevant date for the purpose of commencement of the
arbitration proceeding.” (Emphasis supplied)
153. Remarkably, Milkfood (supra) observes that both under Article 21 of the
UNCITRAL Model Law and by extension Section 21 of the Act, 1996, what is
necessary in a notice or request under the said proiviosn, is the indication that the
claimant seeks arbitration of the dispute. This Court consciously did not hold that
such indication must be of what all disputes is sought to be referred to arbitration.
The relevant observations read as under: -
“27. Article 21 of the Model Law which was modelled on Article 3 of the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules had been adopted for the purpose of drafting Section 21 of the 1996
Act. Section 3 of the 1996 Act provides for as to when a request can be said to have
been received by the respondent. Thus, whether for the purpose of applying the
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
95
provisions of Chapter II of the 1940 Act or for the purpose of Section 21 of the 1996
Act, what is necessary is to issue/serve a request/notice to the respondent indicating
that the claimant seeks arbitration of the dispute.” (Emphasis supplied)
154. The aforesaid observations of Milkfood (supra) when read in conjunction with
the other observations made therein, more particularly paragraph 32, shows that this
Court consistently held that the purpose of Section 21 of the Act, 1996 is for the
determination of various time elements in an arbitration.
155. In State of Goa v. Praveen Enterprises reported in (2012) 12 SCC 581, this Court
elucidated the limited but important function of Section 21 of the Act, 1996. It held
that, in the absence of any contrary stipulation in the arbitration agreement, the
purpose of a notice under Section 21 is only to demarcate the commencement of
arbitral proceedings with respect to a particular dispute.
The issuance of such notice serves primarily to establish a definite point in time when the arbitral
proceedings are in the eyes of law said to have commenced for the purpose of calculating and
reckoning the period of limitation for the substantive claims therein. It was further held that once
arbitral proceedings have commenced, the claimant is not precluded from raising additional claims
that were not mentioned in the original notice of invocation under Section 21 of the Act, 1996. Such
claims may be introduced for the first time in the statement of claim, without necessitating a fresh
notice of invocation. The only caveat, however, is that the limitation period for these additional
claims shall be computed from the date on which they are actually raised in the proceedings.
Similarly, in the case of counter-claims as-well, there is no need to establish a date of
‘commencement’ by issuing a notice under Section 21 of the Act, 1996, as the period of limitation
would be reckoned from the date on which the counterclaim is made before the arbitrator, except
where such claim was initially raised by a notice under Section 21 but subsequently raised as a
counter-claim instead. The relevant observations read as under: -
“15. Taking a cue from the said section, the respondent submitted that arbitral
proceedings can commence only in regard to a dispute in respect of which notice has
been served by a claimant upon the other party, requesting such dispute to be
referred to arbitration; and therefore, a counterclaim can be entertained by the
arbitrator only if it has been referred to him, after a notice seeking arbitration in
regard to such counterclaim. On a careful consideration we find no basis for such a
contention.
16. The purpose of Section 21 is to specify, in the absence of a provision in the
arbitration agreement in that behalf, as to when an arbitral proceeding in regard to a
dispute commences. This becomes relevant for the purpose of Section 43 of the Act.
Sub-
section (1) of Section 43 provides that the Limitation Act, 1963 shall apply to arbitrations as it
applies to proceedings in courts. Sub-section (2) of Section 43 provides that for the purposes of
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
96
Section 43 and the Limitation Act, 1963, an arbitration shall be deemed to have commenced on the
date referred to in Section 21 of the Act. Having regard to Section 43 of the Act, any claim made
beyond the period of limitation prescribed by the Limitation Act, 1963 will be barred by limitation
and the Arbitral Tribunal will have to reject such claims as barred by limitation.
xxx xxx xxx
18. In regard to a claim which is sought to be enforced by filing a civil suit, the question whether the
suit is within the period of limitation is decided with reference to the date of institution of the suit,
that is, the date of presentation of a plaint. As the Limitation Act, 1963 is made applicable to
arbitrations, there is a need to specify the date on which the arbitration is deemed to be instituted or
commenced as that will decide whether the proceedings are barred by limitation or not. Section 3 of
the Limitation Act, 1963 specifies the date of institution for suit, but does not specify the date of
“institution” for arbitration proceedings. Section 21 of the Act supplies the omission. But for Section
21 there would be considerable confusion as to what would be the date of “institution” in regard to
the arbitration proceedings. It will be possible for the respondent in an arbitration to argue that the
limitation has to be calculated as on the date on which statement of claim was filed, or the date on
which the arbitrator entered upon the reference, or the date on which the arbitrator was appointed
by the court, or the date on which the application was filed under Section 11 of the Act. In view of
Section 21 of the Act providing that the arbitration proceedings shall be deemed to commence on the
date on which “a request for that dispute to be referred to arbitration is received by the respondent”
the said confusion is cleared. Therefore, the purpose of Section 21 of the Act is to determine the date
of commencement of the arbitration proceedings, relevant mainly for deciding whether the claims of
the claimant are barred by limitation or not.
19. There can be claims by a claimant even without a notice seeking reference. Let us take an
example where a notice is issued by a claimant raising disputes regarding Claims A and B and
seeking reference thereof to arbitration. On appointment of the arbitrator, the claimant files a claim
statement in regard to the said Claims A and B. Subsequently if the claimant amends the claim
statement by adding Claim C [which is permitted under Section 23(3) of the Act] the additional
Claim C would not be preceded by a notice seeking arbitration. The date of amendment by which
Claim C was introduced, will become the relevant date for determining the limitation in regard to
the said Claim C, whereas the date on which the notice seeking arbitration was served on the other
party, will be the relevant date for deciding the limitation in regard to Claims A and B. Be that as it
may.
20. As far as counterclaims are concerned, there is no room for ambiguity in regard to the relevant
date for determining the limitation. Section 3(2)(b) of the Limitation Act, 1963 provides that in
regard to a counterclaim in suits, the date on which the counterclaim is made in court shall be
deemed to be the date of institution of the counterclaim. As the Limitation Act, 1963 is made
applicable to arbitrations, in the case of a counterclaim by a respondent in an arbitral proceeding,
the date on which the counterclaim is made before the arbitrator will be the date of “institution”
insofar as counterclaim is concerned. There is, therefore, no need to provide a date of
“commencement” as in the case of claims of a claimant. Section 21 of the Act is therefore not
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
97
relevant for counterclaims. There is however one exception. Where the respondent against whom a
claim is made, had also made a claim against the claimant and sought arbitration by serving a notice
to the claimant but subsequently raises that claim as a counterclaim in the arbitration proceedings
initiated by the claimant, instead of filing a separate application under Section 11 of the Act, the
limitation for such counterclaim should be computed, as on the date of service of notice of such
claim on the claimant and not on the date of filing of the counterclaim.” (Emphasis supplied)
156. In Adavya Projects (supra) this Court held that the purpose of a notice under Section 21 of the
Act, 1996 is only to fulfilled the various time-related objects pertaining to the arbitration and the
arbitration agreement. The relevant observation reads as under: -
“11. It is clear that by fixing the date of commencement of arbitral proceedings by
anchoring the same to a notice invoking arbitration, Section 21 of the ACA fulfils
various objects that are time-related. The receipt of such notice is determinative of
the limitation period for substantive disputes as well as the Section 11 application,
and also the law applicable to the arbitration proceedings.” (Emphasis supplied)
157. Adavya Projects (supra) explained the aforesaid object of a notice under Section 21 of the Act,
1996 in four parts: -
(i) First, that the plain language of Section 21 of the Act, 1996 does not expressly
mandate the claimant to send a notice invoking arbitration to the respondents,
instead what it mandates is the receipt of such notice for a ‘commencement of
arbitral proceedings” in terms of the Act, 1996, unless agreed otherwise. The relevant
observations read as under: -
“9. A plain reading of the provision shows that in the absence of an agreement
between the parties, arbitral proceedings are deemed to have commenced when the
respondent receives a request to refer disputes to arbitration. It is clear that Section
21 does not expressly mandate the claimant to send a notice invoking arbitration to
the respondents. However, the provision necessarily mandates such notice as its
receipt by the respondent is required to commence arbitral proceedings, unless the
parties have mutually agreed on another date/event for determining when the
arbitral proceedings have commenced.” (Emphasis supplied)
(ii) Secondly, placing reliance on Milkfood (supra) it held that the date of receipt of
the Section 21 notice is also used to determine whether a dispute has been raised
within the limitation period as specified in the Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963.
The relevant observations read as under: -
“10.1 First, the notice is necessary to determine whether claims are within the period
of limitation or are time- barred. Section 43(1) of the ACA stipulates that the
Limitation Act, 1963 shall apply to arbitrations as it applies to court proceedings.
Further, Section 43(2) provides that for the purpose of the Limitation Act, an
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
98
arbitration shall be deemed to have commenced on the date referred to in Section 21.
Hence, the date of receipt of the Section 21 notice is used to determine whether a
dispute has been raised within the limitation period as specified in the Schedule to
the Limitation Act, as held by this Court in Milkfood Ltd. v. GMC Ice Cream (P) Ltd.5
and State of Goa v. Praveen Enterprises.” (Emphasis supplied)
(iii) Thirdly, that as held in Milkfood (supra) the date of receipt of such notice is also
relevant for determining either (1) when the lex-arbitri or the law governing the
arbitration agreement would apply or (2) for ascertaining the applicability of
Arbitration Act, 1940 and Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement) Act, 1961
to arbitral proceedings commenced prior to the Act, 1996 in terms of Section 85(2)(a)
thereunder. The relevant observations read as under: -
“10.2 Second, the date of receipt of notice is also relevant to determine the applicable
law to the arbitral proceedings. This can be understood in two senses: (i) When the
arbitral proceedings are governed by a law that is different from the proper law of the
contract, the governing law applies only after the arbitral proceedings have
commenced, as held in Milkfood Ltd (supra). And, (ii) Section 85(2)(a) of the ACA
provides that the Arbitration Act, 1940 and Foreign Awards (Recognition and
Enforcement) Act, 1961 will apply to arbitral proceedings that commenced prior to
the ACA coming into force, unless otherwise agreed by the parties. Hence, the date of
invoking arbitration is necessary to determine which arbitration law applies to the
proceedings as per the decisions in Milkfood Ltd (supra) and Geo-Miller & Co (P)
Ltd. v. Chairman, Rajasthan Vidyut Utpadan Nigam Ltd. Similarly, the applicability
of amendments to the ACA to arbitral proceedings is determined by reference to the
date on which such proceedings commenced as per Section 21.” (Emphasis supplied)
(iv) Fourthly, in terms of Nortel Networks (supra), it is also relevant for determining
the ‘failure’ on part of any party to the arbitration agreement in appointment of an
arbitrator to avail the remedy under Section 11 of the Act, 1996 and for the purpose of
reckoning the limitation period for filing an application thereunder for seeking
appointment of the arbitration through a referral court. The relevant observations
read as under: -
“10.3 Third, an application before the High Court or this Court under Section 11(6) of
the ACA for appointment of arbitrator can be filed only after the respondent has
failed to act as per the appointment procedure in the arbitration agreement. Hence,
invocation of arbitration as provided in Section 21, and the subsequent failure of the
respondent to appoint its arbitrator or agree to the appointment of a sole arbitrator
as provided in Sections 11(4) and 11(5), are necessary for invoking the court’s
jurisdiction under Section 11. This is as per the decision of this Court in BSNL v.
Nortel Networks (India) (P) Ltd. Further, the limitation period within which the
Section 11 application must be filed is also calculated with reference to the date on
which the appointment procedure under the arbitration agreement fails.” (Emphasis
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
99
supplied)
158. Adavya Projects (supra) placing reliance on Praveen Enterprises (supra) further held that there
is nothing in the wording of the provision or the scheme of the Act, 1996 that would indicate that a
party to an arbitration agreement – signatory or non-signatory – cannot be impleaded to the
arbitral proceedings, merely because no notice under Section 21 was served on them. Non-service of
the notice under Section 21 and the absence of a dispute being raised against certain parties therein
would not bar their impleadment into the arbitration proceedings. The relevant observations read as
under: -
“12. [...] However, there is nothing in the wording of the provision or the scheme of
the ACA to indicate that merely because such notice was not served on respondent
nos. 2 and 3, they cannot be impleaded as parties to the arbitral proceedings. The
relevant considerations for joining them as parties to the arbitration will be discussed
at a later stage.
13. At this point, it is important to note this Court’s decision in State of Goa v.
Praveen Enterprises (supra) wherein it was held that the claims and disputes raised
in the notice under Section 21 do not restrict and limit the claims that can be raised
before the arbitral tribunal. The consequence of not raising a claim in the notice is
only that the limitation period for such claim that is raised before the arbitral tribunal
for the first time will be calculated differently vis-a-vis claims raised in the notice.
However, non inclusion of certain disputes in the Section 21 notice does not preclude a claimant
from raising them during the arbitration, as long as they are covered under the arbitration
agreement. Further, merely because a respondent did not issue a notice raising counter-claims, he is
not precluded from raising the same before the arbitral tribunal, as long as such counter-claims fall
within the scope of the arbitration agreement.
14. A similar rationale may be adopted in this case as well, especially considering the clear purpose
served by a Section 21 notice. Extending this logic, non-service of the notice under Section 21 and
the absence of disputes being raised against respondent nos. 2 and 3 in the appellant’s notice dated
17.11.2020 do not automatically bar their impleadment as parties to the arbitration proceedings.
xxx xxx xxx
21. [...] it is clear that not being served with a Section 21 notice and not being made a party in the
Section 11 application are not sufficient grounds to hold that a person cannot be made party to
arbitral proceedings.” (Emphasis supplied)
159. It is noteworthy to mention that Adavya Projects (supra) acknowledge that although the
decision of the Delhi High Court in Alupro Building Systems Pvt Ltd. v. Ozone Overseas Pvt Ltd
reported in 2017 SCC OnLine Del 7228, is correct insofar as it hold that some the functions that a
notice under Section 21 of the Act, 1996 serves inter-alia includes (i) informing the other party as to
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
100
the claims, which will enable them to accept or dispute the claims; (ii) enabling the other party to
point out if certain claims are time barred, barred by law, or untenable, or if there are
counter-claims; (iii) for arriving at a consensus for appointment of arbitrators under the arbitration
agreement; (iv) for proposing an arbitrator, to enable the other party to raise any objections/issues
regarding qualification; (v) or for triggering the court’s jurisdiction under Section 11 in case the
appointment procedure fails; and (vi) for fixing the date of commencement of arbitration for the
purpose of Section 43(1), yet the decision of Alupro Building Systems (supra) cannot be construed to
have held that hat the notice under Section 21 is a mandatory requirement before a person can be
made party to arbitral proceedings. Adavya Projects (supra) held that while a notice under Section
21 is mandatory, the non-service of such notice on a party would not nullify the arbitral tribunal’s
jurisdiction over such party. The other purposes served by such notice as delineated by Alupro
Building Systems (supra) are only incidental and secondary, and the primary purpose of such notice
is only to the extent of determination of various time elements in an arbitration. The relevant
observations read as under: -
“30. The Delhi High Court in Alupro Building Systems Pvt Ltd. v. Ozone Overseas Pvt
Ltd. allowed an application under Section 34 of the ACA against an award passed by
an arbitrator who was unilaterally appointed by the respondent therein, without
issuing a notice to the petitioner therein under Section 21 of the ACA. The High Court
proceeded to delineate the various functions served by a Section 21 notice as follows:
(i) To inform the other party as to the claims, which will enable them to accept or
dispute the claims;
(ii) To enable the other party to point out if certain claims are time barred, barred by
law, or untenable, or if there are counter-
claims; (iii) For arriving at a consensus for appointment of arbitrators under the arbitration
agreement; (iv) For parties to inform each other about their proposed arbitrator, to enable the other
party to raise any objections/issues regarding qualification;
(v) To trigger the court’s jurisdiction under Section 11 in case the appointment procedure fails; and
(vi) To fix the date of commencement of arbitration for the purpose of Section 43(1). 30.1 The
decision in Alupro Building Systems (supra) has been relied on by the High Court in its impugned
order to hold that the notice under Section 21 is a mandatory requirement before a person can be
made party to arbitral proceedings.
30.2 While we agree with the decision insofar as holding that the notice under Section 21 is
mandatory, unless the contract provides otherwise, we do not agree with the conclusion that
non-service of such notice on a party nullifies the arbitral tribunal’s jurisdiction over him. The
purpose of the Section 21 notice is clear – by fixing the date of commencement of arbitration, it
enables the calculation of limitation and it is a necessary precondition for filing an application under
Section 11 of the ACA. The other purposes served by such notice – of informing the respondent
about the claims, giving the respondent an opportunity to admit and contest claims and raise
counter-claims, and to object to proposed arbitrators – are only incidental and secondary. We have
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
101
already held that the contents of the notice do not restrict the claims, and any objections regarding
limitation and maintainability can be raised before the arbitral tribunal, and the ACA provides
mechanisms for challenging the appointment of arbitrators on various grounds. Hence, while a
Section 21 notice may perform these functions, it is not the primary or only mechanism envisaged by
the ACA.” (Emphasis supplied)
160. In light of the decision of this Court in Adavya Projects (supra) and a catena of other decisions
as-well as the scope and object of Section 21 of the Act, 1996 in contrast to Section 23 as explained
by us in the foregoing paragraphs, mere non-service of a notice of invocation on a party would not
nullify the arbitral tribunal’s jurisdiction over such party, and that such party can be impleaded and
arrayed in the arbitration proceedings if any claim or counter- claim is made against such party by
the claimant in statement of claims or counter-claims, or by even amending the memo of parties of
the putative statement of claims counter-claims filed by it, provided that such party is found to be
bound by the arbitration agreement either by virtue of it being a signatory, or where such party is a
non-signatory, in terms of the decision of Cox and Kings (I) (supra) as explained by us.
161. In the case on hand, as mentioned earlier, the Tribunal has by way of two separate orders
passed in Section 16 Applications filed by BCSPL, in the first round, and AISPL and ABPL, in the
second round ruled on its jurisdiction and added AISPL and ABPL to the array of parties in the
proceedings. This determination under the principle of ‘kompetenz-kompetenz’ enshrined in
Section 16 of the 1996 Act must be permitted to take its course, given that the arbitral proceedings
are in any case nearing conclusion.
162. The High Court in its impugned judgment while upholding the Arbitrator’s Orders, has rightly
held that ABPL, BCSPL and AISPL ‘fall under the same management, and it appears that the
substitution in the contract, took place merely for convenience...’. Further, ‘all the correspondence is
in respect of the contract with ASF and ASF Group of Companies. There is no differentiation
between BCSPL, AISPL, or ABPL, all of which are part of the ASF Group.’. In arriving at its
conclusion, the High Court correctly applied the test laid down in Cox and Kings Ltd. (I) (supra),
taking note of the communications exchanged, conduct of the ASF Group officials, active
involvement of the appellant with contractual obligations, intertwined nature of the agreements
involving BCSPL, AISPL, and ABPL and the composite business operations.
163. The conclusion reached by the Arbitral Tribunal and the High Court is premised on the
following: -
(i) SPCPL had made out a case supported by material, which cannot be rejected at the
preliminary stage, that AISPL and ABPL are inextricably linked to and operationally
holding control over the performance of the Works Contract and Settlement
Agreement which are the subject matter of the arbitral proceedings.
(ii) SPCPL had rightly invoked the doctrine of Group of Companies to justify
inclusion of the non-signatories.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
102
(iii) Having regard to the chronology of events leading to the execution of the
Settlement Agreement, prima facie, both ASPL and ABPL are proper parties, if not
necessary, even to the claim of BCSPL.
(iv) The High Court, in particular, noted the factor of mutual intent, the same
demonstrated by AISPL and ABPL; substantial involvement in the negotiations,
performance, and termination of the various contracts entered into between the
parties. The continuous use of ASF insignia and the participation of ASF Group
officials in correspondences indicate that all entities within the ASF Group intended
to be bound by the same arbitration agreement.
(v) AISPL and ABPL, as subsidiaries within the ASF Group, have a direct relationship
with BCSPL. They all have common directors, if not the same directors. Their
interconnected roles in the Black Canyon project, as evidenced by their involvement
in securing demobilization by SPCPL and other contractual obligations, highlight this
relationship.
(vi) The Works Contract, the Novation Agreement, the Settlement Agreement, and
the Comfort Letter all pertain to the same redevelopment project of the Black Canyon
project. The shared subject matter across these agreements establishes a
‘commonality’ that justifies the inclusion of AISPL and ABPL in the arbitration
proceedings. Further, the various transactions entered into the between the parties
must form a cohesive whole, indicating that they cannot be viewed in isolation. The
intertwined nature of the agreements involving BCSPL, AISPL, and ABPL
demonstrates that these transactions form a composite whole. The responsibilities
across the ASF Group entities reflect a composite business operation.
164. The judicial trend is that all issues should be before the Arbitral Tribunal and the power under
Section 11 sub-section (6A) is restricted to examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement.
The concept of a ‘reference’ as it existed under the Arbitration Act, 1940 does not find itself in the
1996 Act. Once the Arbitral Tribunal stands appointed, all disputes and issues are to be decided by it
as a ‘one-stop forum’ for adjudication. [See: Gammon India Ltd. v. NHAI, reported in 2020 SCC
OnLine Del 659]
165. As aforementioned, Section 7(4)(b) of the Act, 1996 provides that an Arbitration Agreement
may be contained in exchange of telecommunication, such as emails, which provide a record of the
principal agreement. Emails have been exchanged between SPCPL and ASF Group as a whole,
where admission of liability on the part of ASF Group to make payment under the Settlement
Agreement stands established. Clause 12 of the Settlement Agreement makes the dispute resolution
clause of the Works Contract applicable in the present case.
166. In Govind Rubber Ltd. v. Louis Dreyfus Commodities Asia (P) Ltd., reported in (2015) 13 SCC
477, this Court has held that signature is not a formal requirement under Section 7(4)(b) or 7(4)(c)
or under Section 7(5) of the 1996 Act. This position is further supported by the definition of a ‘party’
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
103
in Section 2(h) of the 1996 Act to include a ‘party to an arbitration agreement’ and not a signatory to
an arbitration agreement. Section 7 of the 1996 Act also does not stipulate a qualification that a
party must be a signatory to the arbitration agreement or the principal agreement containing the
arbitration clause. This was also reiterated in Cox and Kings Ltd. (I) (supra).
167. Even the non-issuance of Section 21 notice on the appellant cannot be said to be fatal to its
impleadment. The principle of consensus ad idem for referring disputes to arbitral tribunals applies
to the signatories to the arbitration agreement and not non-signatories who are sought to be
impleaded.
168. The decision of this Court in Praveen Enterprises (supra), , on which strong reliance has been
placed on behalf of the ABPL, as already discussed, is contrary to their contention and rather
fortifies SPCPL’s argument in this regard, where this Court held that a notice under Section 21 of the
1996 Act is not relevant for counterclaims.
169. We have looked into the other decisions also relied upon by Mr. Kamat in support of his
submissions, however, they are of no avail to the appellant.
D. CONCLUSION
170. Before we close this matter, we would like to say something as regards the litigation which has
unfolded before us. The Arbitration Act was the first legislative enactment that dealt with arbitration
that came into force in 1940. Fifty years, later, the aforesaid legislation was replaced by the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. It has been almost, thirty-years, since the Act, 1996 has
remained in force. Various amendments to the Act, 1996 have been made over the years so as to
ensure that arbitration proceedings are conducted and concluded expeditiously. It is indeed very sad
to note that even after these many years, procedural issues such as the one involved in the case at
hand, have continued to plaque the arbitration regime of India. The Department of Legal Affairs has
now, once again proposed to replace the existing legislation on arbitration with the Arbitration and
Conciliation Bill, 2024. Unfortunately, even the new Bill has taken no steps whatsoever, for
ameliorating the position of law as regards the power of impleadment or joinder of an arbitral
tribunal. What is expressly missing in the Act, 1996 is still missing in the Arbitration and
Conciliation Bill, 2024, despite a catena of decisions of this Court as-well as the various High Courts,
highlighting the need for statutory recognition of such power in order to obviate all possibilities of
confusion. As observed in Gayatri Balasamy (supra), any uncertainty in the law of arbitration would
be an anathema to business and commerce. We urge, the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of
Law and Justice to take a serious look at the arbitration regime that is prevailing in India and bring
about necessary changes while the Arbitration and Conciliation Bill, 2024 is still being considered.
171. In the overall view of the matter, we are convinced that no error, not to speak of any error of
law, could be said to have been committed by the High Court in passing the impugned judgment and
order.
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
104
172. All other legal contentions available to the parties are kept open to be canvassed before the
Arbitral Tribunal.
173. For all the foregoing reasons, this appeal fails and is hereby dismissed.
174. Pending application, if any, also stands disposed of accordingly.
175. The Registry shall forward one copy each of this judgment to all the High Courts across the
country and the Principal Secretary, Ministry of Law & Justice.
........................................................... J.
(J.B. Pardiwala) ........................................................... J.
(R. Mahadevan) New Delhi;
02nd May, 2025
Asf Buildtech Private Limited vs Shapoorji Pallonji And Company Private ... on 2 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114219041/
105
