The Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2025
UNION OF INDIA
India
The Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2025
MINISTRYOFHOMEAFFAIRS. 10 of 2025
Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary 10 on 29 March 2025
• 
Commenced on 29 March 2025
• 
[This is the version of this document from 29 March 2025.]
• 
An Act to amend the Disaster Management Act, 2005.BE it enacted by Parliament in the
Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
1. Short title and commencement.
(1)This Act may be called the Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2025.(2)It shall come into
force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Amendment of section 2.
In section 2 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act),–(i)in clause (d), the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:––'Explanation.- For the
removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the expression “man made causes” does not include any
law and order related matter or situation, or any situation arising from a law and order related
matter or situation;’;(ii)after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–‘(da)
“disaster database” means a database which includes disaster assessment, fund allocation detail,
expenditure, preparedness and mitigation plan, risk register according to type and severity of risk
and such other relevant matters, in accordance with such policy, as may be determined by the
Central Government;’;(iii)in clause (e),––(a)in sub-clause (viii), for the words “rehabilitation and
reconstruction”, the words “rehabilitation, recovery and reconstruction” shall be substituted;(b)the
following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:–'Explanation.- For the purposes of this clause, the
expression “disaster management” is inclusive of “disaster risk reduction”, that is, the practice of
reducing disaster risk through systematic effort to analyse and manage the causal facts of disaster
through–(i)reduced exposure to hazard;(ii)reduced vulnerability of people, property, infrastructure,
economic activity, environmental and natural resource; and(iii)improved preparedness, resilience
and capacity to manage and respond to adverse event;’;(iv)after clause (e), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:–‘(ea) “disaster risk” means the potential loss of life, injury, destroyed or
damaged property, infrastructure and assets, economic and social disruption and environmental
degradation, which could occur to a system, society or a community in a specific period of time,
determined probabilistically as a function of hazard, exposure, vulnerability and
The Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184388727/
1
capacity.Explanation.- For the purposes of this Act, the expression “infrastructure” refers to
physical structures, facilities, networks, systems and assets, which provide services that are essential
to the social, ecological and economic functioning of a community or society;’;(v)after clause (g), the
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–‘(ga) “evacuation” means moving people or assets
temporarily to safer places before, during or after the occurrence of a hazardous event(gb)
“exposure” means the situation of people, buildings, infrastructure, production capacities and other
tangible human assets, the environment and natural resources located in hazard-prone
areas.Explanation.- For the purposes of this clause, the expression “hazard-prone areas” means
those locations where different hazards are known to have occurred or likely to occur;(gc) “hazard”
means a process or phenomenon relating to a disaster that may cause—(a)loss of life;(b)injury or
other health impacts;(c)damage to property, buildings and infrastructure;(d)social and economic
disruption; or(e)environmental degradation;(gd) “High Level Committee” means the Committee
constituted under section 8B;’;(vi)in clause (h), after the words “Zila Parishad”, the words “or
Autonomous District Council” shall be inserted(vii)in clause (i), after the word “situation”, the
words “including the provisioning of disaster-resilient infrastructure” shall be inserted;(viii)after
clause (j), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––‘(ja) “National Crisis Management
Committee” means the Committee constituted under section 8A;’;(ix)after clause (l), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:–‘(la) “National Policy” means a statement of guiding principles,
and broad course of actions adopted by the Government at the national and state level in pursuit
of,–(a)national objectives of reducing disaster risk and loss;(b)improving preparedness;
and(c)ensuring resilient recovery from disaster;’;(x)for clause (m), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:–‘(m) “preparedness” means the knowledge and capacity of Government,
response and recovery organisation, community and individual to anticipate, respond to and recover
from threatening disaster situation or disaster;’;(xi)after clause (n), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:–‘(na) “prevention” means activity and measure to avoid potential adverse impact
of disaster;’;(xii)for clause (o), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:––‘(o)
“reconstruction” means rebuilding and restoration of infrastructure, service, building and facility
required for the functioning of a community affected by a disaster;(oa) “recovery” means the
restoration or improvement of economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets, system
and activity, of a disaster-affected community;(ob) “rehabilitation” means the restoration of basic
service, facility and capacity for the functioning of a disaster-affected community;(oc) “resilience”
means the ability of a system, community or society exposed to hazards to resist, absorb, respond to
and recover from the effects of a hazard in a timely and efficient manner and the expression
“resilient” shall be construed accordingly;’;(xiii)after clause (p), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:––‘(pa) “response” means the action taken directly before, during or after a
disaster in order to save lives, reduce injury and health impact, ensure public safety and meet the
basic subsistence needs of the people affected;’;(xiv)after clause (t), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:––‘(u) “Urban Authority” means the Urban Disaster Management Authority
constituted under sub-section (1) of section 41A;(v) “Urban Plan” means the plan for disaster
management, prepared by the Urban Authority under sub-section (4) of section 41A;(w)
“vulnerability” means the conditions determined by physical, social, economic and environmental
factor or process which increase the susceptibility of an individual, a community, asset,
infrastructure or system to the impact of hazard.’.
The Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184388727/
2
3. Amendment of section 3.
In section 3 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:––“(3A) The day-to-day functions of the National Authority shall be performed by the
Vice-Chairperson and in the absence of the Vice-Chairperson, by a member designated by the
Chairperson or, as the case may be, the Vice-Chairperson, of the National Authority.”.
4. Substitution of new section for section 5.
For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:––Appointment
of officers and other employees of National Authority."5.(1) The National Authority may, with the
previous approval of the Central Government, specify the number, nature and category of officers
and other employees, as is necessary to carry out its functions.(2)The National Authority may also
appoint experts and consultants as necessary to perform its functions.(3)The salaries and
allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of officers, other employees,
experts and consultants of the National Authority, shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.”.
5. Amendment of section 6.
In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),––(i)for clause (b), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:––“(b) coordinate the preparation and approval of the National Plan;”;(ii)in
clause (i), after the words “take such other measures”, the words “which includes providing technical
guidance to State Governments and State Authorities” shall be inserted;(iii)after clause (j), the
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:––‘(k) coordinate and monitor the implementation of
the National Policy;(l) lay down guidelines for preparing disaster management plan by different
Ministries or Departments of the Central Government and the State Authorities;(m) provide
necessary technical guidance to the State Governments and the State Authorities for preparing their
disaster management plans in accordance with the guidelines laid down by it;(n) provide necessary
advice and technical guidance to different Ministries or Departments and agencies of the
Government of India, and the State Governments regarding mitigation, preparedness, and recovery
and reconstruction measures;(o) take stock of the entire range of disaster risks in the country
periodically, including emerging disaster risks, and issue updated guidance for their
mitigation.Explanation.- For the purposes of this clause, it is hereby clarified that the expression
“emerging disaster risks” refer to risks of those disasters that may not have taken place, but may
occur in future due to extreme climate events and other factors as may be determined by the
National Authority;(p) plan and coordinate specialised training programmes for disaster
management for different levels of officers, employees andvoluntary rescue workers;(q) provide
necessary technical guidance or give advice to the State Authorities, District Authorities and Urban
Authorities for carrying out their functions under this Act;(r) promote general education and
awareness in relation to disaste management;(s) monitor the implementation of the guidelines laid
down by the National Authority for integrating disaster prevention and mitigation measures in the
development plans and projects of Ministries or Departments of the Government of India;(t)
undertake disaster preparedness assessment of each State periodically, in line with the National
The Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184388727/
3
Plan and the guidelines laid down by it;(u) undertake in the aftermath of severe disaster in any
State, post disaster audit of preparedness and response activities of the State;(v) create a national
disaster database in accordance with such policy as may be determined by the Central
Government;(w) recommend guidelines for the minimum standards of relief to be provided to
persons affected by disaster, which may include,—(i)the minimum requirements to be provided in
the relief camps in relation to shelter, food, drinking water, medical cover and sanitation;(ii)the
special provision to be made for widows and orphans;(iii)ex gratia assistance on account of loss of
life as also assistance on account of damage to houses and for restoration of means of livelihood;
and(iv)such other reliefs as the National Authority may deem appropriate.
6. Insertion of new sections 8A and 8B.
After section 8 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:––National
Crisis Management Committee."8A(1). The National Crisis Management Committee constituted by
the Government of India prior to the commencement of the Disaster Management (Amendment)
Act, 2025, shall be the National Crisis Management Committee for the purposes of this Act and act
as the nodal body to deal with the major disasters which have serious or national ramifications.(2)
The National Crisis Management Committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall consist of the
Cabinet Secretary as Chairperson and such other members as may be notified by the Central
Government.(3) The Chairperson of the National Crisis Management Committee may invite any
other officer of the Central Government or a State Government for taking part in any meeting of
such Committee and shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as the Central
Government may determine.(4) The procedure to be followed by the National Crisis Management
Committee, in exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions, shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.High Level Committee.8B.(1) The High Level Committee
constituted by the Government of India prior to the commencement of the Disaster Management
(Amendment) Act, 2025, shall be the High Level Committee for the purposes of this Act which shall
provide the financial assistance as envisaged under section 46 to the State Governments in the event
of a disaster and approve the financial assistance for mitigation needs under section 47.(2) The High
Level Committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall consist of the Minister in-charge of the Ministry
or Department of the Central Government having administrative control over the disaster
management as the Chairperson and such other members as may be notified by the Central
Government.”.
7. Amendment of section 10.
In section 10 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––'(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the
National Executive Committee may,–(a) act as the coordinating body for disaster management;(b)
monitor the implementation of the National Plan and the plans prepared by the Ministries or
Departments of the Government of India;(c) monitor, coordinate and give directions regarding the
mitigation and preparedness measures to be taken by different Ministries or Departments and
agencies of the Government of India;(d) evaluate the preparedness at all governmental levels for the
purpose of responding to any threatening disaster situation or disaster and provide necessary
The Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184388727/
4
advice, where necessary, for enhancing such preparedness;(e) coordinate response in the event of
any threatening disaster situation or disaster;(f) lay down guidelines, or give directions to,
Ministries or Departments of the Government of India, the State Governments and the State
Authorities concerned regarding measures to be taken by them in response to any threatening
disaster situation or disaster;(g) require any Ministry or Department or agency of the Government
to make available to the Central Government or State Government such men or material resources
as are available with it for the purposes of emergency response, rescue and relief;(h) advise, assist
and coordinate the activities of the Ministries or Departments of the Government of India, State
Governments, statutory bodies, other governmental or non-governmental organisations and others
engaged in disaster management;(i) in the event of a disaster or a threatening disaster situation
affecting more than one State, issue directions for:—(i)coordination between the States
concerned;(ii)containment measures as deemed necessary;(iii)monitoring and forecasting the
effects of the disaster across multiple States;(iv)deployment of specialised teams, material resources
and equipment;(v)requisitioning of necessary resources and technical capacities from public and
private entities and their deployment towards reducing the impact of the disaster;(vi)adequate
public awareness measures; and(vii)coordination of support to individuals and communities
affected by containment measures; and(j) perform such other functions as it may deem
appropriate.Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, it is hereby clarified that the expression
“containment measures” means the actions and strategies adopted at the individual, community,
district, State, multi-State or national levels aimed at controlling or slowing the spread of a disaster
from its initial focal area.’.
8. Amendment of section 11.
In section 11 of the principal Act,–(i)for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:––“(2) The National Authority shall coordinate, in consultation with the
Central Government and the State Governments and other stakeholders in the field of disaster
management, for preparation and approval of the National Plan having regard to the National
Policy.”;(ii)for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:––“(4) The
National Authority shall review the National Plan once in every three years and update at least once
in every five years.”.
9. Omission of sections 12 and 13.
Sections 12 and 13 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
10. Amendment of section 18.
In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),––(i)for clause (b), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:–“(b) coordinate the preparation, and approve the State Plan in accordance
with the guidelines laid down by the National Authority;”;(ii)after clause (c), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:-“(ca) approve the District Plan and Urban Plan, prepared by the District
Authorities and Urban Authorities respectively, in accordance with the National Plan and State
Plan;”;(iii)after clause (h), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:––"(i) take stock of the
The Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184388727/
5
entire range of disaster risks in the State, periodically including emerging disaster risks, and take
necessary measures for their mitigation;(j) coordinate and monitor the implementation of the
National Policy, the National Plan and the State Plan;(k) lay down guidelines for preparation of
disaster management plan by the Departments of the Government of the State, the District
Authorities and the Urban Authorities;(l) promote general education, awareness and community
training in regard to the forms of disasters to which different parts of the State are vulnerable and
the measures that may be taken by such community to prevent the disaster, mitigate and respond to
such disaster;(m) provide necessary technical assistance or give advice to the District Authorities,
local authorities and Urban Authorities for carrying out their functions effectively;(n) provide
information to the National Authority relating to different aspects of disaster management;(o) lay
down guidelines for standards of relief to persons affected by disasters in the State:Provided that
such standards shall in no case be less than the minimum standards in the guidelines laid down by
the National Authority in this regard;(p) maintain the State disaster database and provide inputs to
the National disaster database.”.
11. Omission of section 19.
Section 19 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
12. Amendment of section 20.
In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (b), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:–“(c) the Director General of Police of the State shall be member of the State
Executive Committee, ex officio.”.
13. Amendment of section 22.
In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),–(i)clauses (a) and (c) shall be omitted;(ii)in
clause (d), for the words “and District Authorities”, the words “, the District Authorities and the
Urban Authorities” shall be substituted;(iii)clause (i) shall be omitted;(iv)in clause (j), after the
words “District Authorities”, the words“, Urban Authorities,” shall be inserted;(v)clause (k) shall be
omitted;(vi)in clause (m), for the words “District Authority or the local authority”, the words
“District Authority, Urban Authority or the local authority” shall be substituted;(vii)clause (n) shall
be omitted.
14. Amendment of section 23.
In section 23 of the principal Act,––(i)for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:––“(2) The State Authority shall coordinate the preparation of the State Plan
having regard to the National Plan and guidelines laid down by the National Authority, and in
consultation with local authorities, District Authorities, Urban Authorities and the people’s
representatives as the State Authority may deem fit.”;(ii)for sub-section (3), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:––“(3) The State Plan shall be approved by the State
The Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184388727/
6
Authority.”;(iii)in sub-section (4), for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:––“(a) the exposure of different parts of the State to different hazards and vulnerability of
its people, assets, infrastructure, livelihood and economic activity to those hazards;”;(iv)or
sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:––“(5) The State Authority
shall review the State Plan once in every three years and update atleast once in every five years.”.
15. Amendment of section 24.
In section 24 of the principal Act, in clause (e), after the words “any District Authority”, the words “,
any Urban Authority” shall be inserted.
16. Amendment of section 25.
In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for clause (f), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:––“(f) not exceeding two other Members to be appointed by the State
Government who may be taken from other district level officers, disaster management experts and
civil society organisation.”.
17. Amendment of section 31.
In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the word “annually”, the words “at least
once in every two years or earlier as necessary” shall be substituted.
18. Amendment of section 35.
In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),––(i)in clause (a), for the words “coordination
of actions”, the words “coordinate and monitor actions” shall be substituted;(ii)clauses (b) and (d)
shall be omitted;(iii)after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––“(ha) notify
the Ministries or Departments of the Government of India which shall have the responsibility for
monitoring, early warning, prevention, mitigation, preparedness and capacity building with regard
to disasters arising from various hazards;”.
19. Amendment of section 36.
In section 36 of the principal Act,–(i)for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:–“(f) provide assistance to the National Authority and State Government for drawing up
mitigation, preparedness and response plans, capacity building, data collection and identification
and training of personnel in relation to disaster management;”;(ii)in clause (g), after sub-clause (v),
the following sub-clauses shall be inserted, namely:––"(vi) carrying out rescue and relief operations
in the affected area;(vii) assessing the damage from any disaster; and(viii) carrying out the
rehabilitation and re-construction;”
The Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184388727/
7
20. Amendment of section 38.
In section 38 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),–(i)in clause (a),––(a) after the words “District
Authorities”, the words “, Urban Authorities” shall be inserted;(b) for the words “local authority”,
the words “local authorities” shall be substituted;(ii)in clause (b), for the words “and the District
Authorities”, the words “the District Authorities and the Urban Authorities” shall be
substituted;(iii)in clause (d), for the words “and the District Plans”, the words “, the District Plans
and the Urban Plans” shall be substituted(iv)in clause (i), for the words “and the District
Authorities”, the words “, the District Authorities and the Urban Authorities” shall be
substituted;(v)after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––“(ia) notify
State-specific hazard-wise nodal Departments, which shall have the responsibility for monitoring,
early warning, prevention, mitigation, preparedness and capacity building with regard to disasters
arising from those State-specific hazards;”;(vi)in clause (j), for the words “or the District
Authorities”, the words“, the District Authorities or the Urban Authorities” shall be
substituted;(vii)for clause (k), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:–“(k) provide
recovery and reconstruction assistance to the victims of any disaster; and”.
21. Amendment of section 39.
In section 39 of the principal Act,(a) in clause (f), for the words “and District Authorities”, the words
“District Authorities and Urban Authorities” shall be substituted(b) in clause (g), after the words
“authorities at the district level”, the words “and the Urban Plan by the Urban Authorities” shall be
inserted;(c) in clause (h), after the words “District Authorities”, the words “or the Urban
Authorities” shall be inserted.
22. Amendment of section 41.
In section 41 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (d), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:––“(e) prepare a disaster management plan as referred to in section 32.”.
23. Insertion of new section 41A.
After section 41 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:–'41A.(1)-The
State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a separate Urban Disaster
Management Authority for their State capitals and all cities having a Municipal Corporation, except
for the National Capital Territory of Delhi and Union territory of Chandigarh.(2)The Urban
Authority constituted under sub-section (1) shall consist of the following, namely:––(i)the
Municipal Commissioner—Chairperson, ex officio;(ii)the District Collector of the District
concerned—Vice Chairperson, ex officio; and(iii)such other members, with such pay and allowances
as may be determined by the State Government—members.(3)The Urban Authority may have a
separate Secretariat at such place in the district as may be determined by the State
Government.(4)The Urban Authority shall be responsible for preparation of Urban Plan, which shall
be approved by the State Authority.(5)The Urban Authority shall be responsible for coordinating the
The Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184388727/
8
implementation of the Urban Plan.(6)The other functions and powers and such other matters
relating to the Urban Authority shall be such as may be prescribed by the State
Government.Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, the expression “Municipal Corporation”
means a Municipal Corporation as referred to in clause (c) of article 243Q of the Constitution.’.
24. Substitution of new section for section 43.
For section 43 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—Officers,
employees, experts and consultants of National Institute."43.(1) The Central Government shall
provide the National Institute of Disaster Management with such officers, other employees and
consultants, as it considers necessary, for carrying out its functions.(2)The National Institute may
recruit experts as per norms approved by the Central Government to perform such functions as
provided in sub-section (9) of section 42.(3)The salaries, allowances payable to officers and
employees and the other terms and conditions of their service shall be such as may be prescribed.”.
25. Amendment of Chapter VIII.
In Chapter VIII of the principal Act, for the heading, the heading “DISASTER R ESPONSE F ORCE”
shall be substituted.
26. Insertion of new section 44A.
After section 44 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:––State Disaster
Response Force."44A.(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a State Disaster Response Force for the purpose of specialist response to a threatening
disaster situation or disaster.(2)Subject to the provisions of this Act, the State Disaster Response
Force shall be constituted in such manner, with such functions and the terms and conditions of
service of the members of such Force shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government
concerned.”.
27. Amendment of section 46.
In section 46 of the principal Act,–(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “for meeting any threatening
disaster situation or disaster”, the words “for meeting different aspects of disaster management”
shall be substituted;(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––“(2) The Fund constituted under sub-section (1), shall be applied in accordance with the
guidelines laid down by the Central Government in consultation with the National Authority.”.
28. Amendment of section 47.
In section 47 of the principal Act,––(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “for projects exclusively for
the purpose of mitigation”, the words “for meeting disaster mitigation needs” shall be
substituted;(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:––“(2)
The Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184388727/
9
The Fund constituted under sub-section (1), shall be applied in accordance with the guidelines laid
down by the Central Government in consultation with the National Authority.”.
29. Amendment of section 48.
In section 48 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:–“(2) The State Government shall ensure that the funds established––(i) under clauses (a)
and (c) of sub-section (1) are available to the State Executive Committee and the State Authority
respectively and are applied as per the guidelines issued by the Central Government in consultation
with the National Authority;(ii) under clauses (b) and (d) of sub-section (1) are available to the
District Authority.”.
30. Amendment of section 50.
In section 50 of the principal Act,—(i) in the opening portion, after the words “or the District
Authority”, the words “or the Urban Authority” shall be inserted;(ii) in clause (b), after the words “or
District Authority”, the words “or Urban Authority” shall be inserted.
31. Amendment of section 51.
In section 51 of the principal Act,––(i) in clause (a), after the words “or District Authority”, the
words “or Urban Authority” shall be inserted;(ii) in clause (b), after the words “or the District
Authority”, the words “or the Urban Authority” shall be inserted.
32. Amendment of section 52.
In section 52 of the principal Act, for the words “or the District Authority”, the words “, the District
Authority or the Urban Authority” shall be substituted.
33. Amendment of section 56.
Section 56 of the principal Act shall be numbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1)
as so numbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:––“(2) Notwithstanding any
action under sub-section (1), it shall be lawful for the State Government on its own or on the
directions given by the Central Government to take such disciplinary action under the relevant rules,
against any officer who ceases or refuses to perform or withdraws himself from the duties of his
office or on grounds of insubordination or dereliction of duty during a disaster:Provided that the
action taken by the State Government shall not be inconsistent with the directions given by the
Central Government.”.
The Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184388727/
10
34. Amendment of section 59.
In section 59 of the principal Act, for the word and figures “and 56”, the words, brackets and figures
“and sub-section (1) of section 56” shall be substituted.
35. Amendment of section 60.
In section 60 of the principal Act, in clause (a) and clause (b), after the words “the District
Authority”, the words “, the Urban Authority” shall be inserted.
36. Insertion of new section 60A.
After section 60 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—Power of
Central Government or State Government to take action in relation to nature of hazard and
punishment for its contravention."60A.(1) The Central Government or the State Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, require any person to take any action or refrain from taking
any action, in relation to the nature of the hazard, which in the opinion of the Central Government
or the State Government, as the case may be, is required for reducing the impact of a disaster.(2)
Any notification issued under this section shall be valid for a period specified therein or six months,
whichever is earlier.(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this section shall be liable to pay a
penalty as specified in the notification of the Central Government or the State Government, as the
case may be:Provided that the penalty referred to in this sub-section shall not exceed ten thousand
rupees.”.
37. Amendment of section 61.
In section 61 of the principal Act, the words “compensation and” shall be omitted.
38. Amendment of section 63.
In section 63 of the principal Act, after the words “or District Authority”, the words “or Urban
Authority” shall be inserted.
39. Amendment of section 64.
In section 64 of the principal Act, after the words “or the District Authority”, the words “or the
Urban Authority” shall be inserted
40. Amendment of section 65.
In section 65 of the principal Act,–(i) in sub-section (1), in the opening portion, after the words “or
District Authority”, the words “or Urban Authority” shall be inserted;(ii) in sub-section (3), for
clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:––“(a) “resources” includes human and
The Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184388727/
11
material resources, and equipment;”.
41. Amendment of section 67.
In section 67 of the principal Act, for the words “or a District Authority”, the words “, a District
Authority or an Urban Authority” shall be substituted.
42. Amendment of section 68.
In section 68 of the principal Act, for the words “or the District Authority” occurring at both the
places, the words “, a District Authority or an Urban Authority” shall be substituted.
43. Amendment of section 69.
In section 69 of the principal Act, after the words “State Executive Committee”, the words “National
Authority, State Authority, District Authority or Urban Authority” shall be inserted.
44. Amendment of section 71.
In section 71 of the principal Act, for the words “or District Authority”, the words “, District
Authority or Urban Authority” shall be substituted.
45. Amendment of section 73.
In section 73 of the principal Act, after the words “the District Authority” occurring at both the
places, the words “or the Urban Authority” shall be inserted.
46. Amendment of section 74.
In section 74 of the principal Act, for the words “or District Authority”, the words “, District
Authority or Urban Authority” shall be substituted.
47. Amendment of section 75.
In section 75 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),––(i)after clause (a), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:–“(aa) the salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of
officers, other employees, experts and consultants of the National Authority under sub-section (3) of
section 5;”;(ii)after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–“(ca) the procedure to
be followed by the National Crisis Management Committee in exercise of its powers and discharging
of its functions under sub-section (4) of section 8A;”;(iii)after clause (e), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:—“(ea) the salaries, allowances and the other terms and conditions of service of
officers and other employees of the National Institute under sub-section (3) of section 43;”.
The Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184388727/
12
48. Insertion of new section 76A.
After section 76 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:–Power of
National Authority to make regulations."76A. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 76, the
National Authority, with the previous approval of the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, make regulations, other than regulations made under section 76, consistent
with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act.”.
49. Amendment of section 77.
In section 77 of the principal Act, after the words “National Institute of Disaster Management”, the
words “and the National Authority” shall be inserted.
50. Amendment of section 78.
In section 78 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (f), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:––“(fa) the powers, functions and other matters relating to Urban Authority under
sub-section (6) of section 41A;(fb) the manner of constitution of State Disaster Response Force, its
functions and the terms and conditions of service of members of such Force under sub-section (2) of
section 44A;”.
51. Amendment of section 79.
In section 79 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1) and the proviso thereunder, the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act as amended by the Disaster
Management (Amendment) Act, 2025, the Central Government may, by order published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:Provided that no such order
shall be made under this sub-section after the expiry of a period of three years from the date of
commencement of the Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2025.”.
The Disaster Management (Amendment) Act, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184388727/
13
