The Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act,
2025
UNION OF INDIA
India
The Oilfields (Regulation and Development)
Amendment Act, 2025
MINISTRYOFPETROLEUMANDNATURALGAS 6 of 2025
Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary 6 on 25 March 2025
• 
Commenced on 25 March 2025
• 
[This is the version of this document from 25 March 2025.]
• 
An Act to furthur amend the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948.BE it enacted by
Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
1. Short Title and Commencement.
(1)This Act may be called the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 2025.(2)It
shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint.
2. Amendment of section 3.
In the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in section 3,––(i)clause (b) shall be omitted;(ii)for clause (c), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:––‘(c) “mineral oils” means any naturally occurring hydrocarbon, whether in
the form of natural gas or in a liquid, viscous or solid form, or a mixture thereof, and includes crude
oil, natural gas, petroleum, condensate, coal bed methane, oil shale, shale gas, shale oil, tight gas,
tight oil, gas hydrate in their usual industrial connotation and other gases occurring in association
with mineral oils, but does not include coal, lignite and helium occurring in association with
petroleum or coal or shale;’;(iii)in clause (d), after the word “license”, the words, brackets and
figures “granted before the commencement of the Oilfields (Regulation and Development)
Amendment Act, 2025” shall be inserted;(iv)in clause (e), for the words “natural gas and petroleum,
crude oil”, the words “mineral oils” shall be substituted;(v)after clause (e), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:—‘(f) “petroleum lease” means a lease granted on or after the commencement of
the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 2025, for the purpose of prospecting,
exploration, development, production, making merchantable, carrying away or disposing of mineral
oils or for purposes connected therewith, and includes a mining lease granted before the
commencement of the said Act.’.
The Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107759007/
1
3. Amendment of section 4.
In section 4 of the principal Act,––(a)in the marginal heading, for the words “mining lease”, the
words “petroleum lease” shall be substituted;(b)for the words “mining lease” at both the places
where they occur, the words “petroleum lease” shall be substituted.
4. Insertion of new section 4A.
After section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:––“4A. No
person shall undertake any operation in any part of India or in its territorial waters, continental
shelf and exclusive economic zone for the purposes of prospecting, exploration, development or
production, making merchantable, carrying away or disposing of mineral oils, except under a valid
lease granted under this Act and the rules made thereunder:Provided that nothing in this section
shall affect any operation undertaken in any area in accordance with the terms and conditions of a
license or lease granted before the commencement of the Oilfields (Regulation and Development)
Amendment Act, 2025.”.
5. Amendment of section 5.
In section 5 of the principal Act,-(A)in the marginal heading, for the words “mining leases”, the
words “petroleum leases” shall be substituted;(B)in sub-section (1), for the words “grant of mining
leases or for prohibiting the grant”, the words “grant or extension or renewal of petroleum leases or
for prohibiting the grant or extension or renewal” shall be substituted;(C)in sub-section (2),––(i)in
clause (a), for the words “mining leases”, the words “petroleum leases” shall be substituted;(ii)in
clause (b), for the words “mining leases may be granted”, the words “petroleum leases may be
granted or extended or renewed” shall be substituted;(iii)for clause (c), the following clauses shall be
substituted, namely:––“(c) the maximum or minimum area of the petroleum leases; (ca) the period
for which any petroleum lease may be granted or extended or renewed;(cb) the terms on which
petroleum leases may be merged or combined;”;(iv)in clause (d), for the word “mine”, the word
“oilfield” shall be substituted;(v)after clause (d), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:––“(e) the mechanism to enable resolution of disputes arising out of, or in relation to the
petroleum leases or any authorisation granted by the Central Government for working of an oilfield
through alternative dispute resolution methods under any law for the time being in force, in a place
within India or outside India;(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be made by rules
or in respect of which provision is to be made under this section.”;(D)after sub-section (2), the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:––“(3) The terms and conditions of a petroleum
lease shall remain stable during the period of the lease for expeditious and efficient development of
oilfields or production of mineral oils and shall not be altered to the disadvantage of the lessee
during the period of the lease.”.
6. Amendment of section 6.
In section 6 of the principal Act,––(A)in the marginal heading, for the word “mineral”, the words
The Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107759007/
2
“mineral oils” shall be substituted;(B)in sub-section (1), for the words “conservation and
development”, the words “exploration, development, production and conservation” shall be
substituted;(C)in sub-section (2),––(i)in clause (d),––(a)for the words “oil wells”, the words
“mineral oil wells and decommissioning and site restoration activities” shall be substituted;(b)for
the word “oil”, the words “mineral oils” shall be substituted;(ii)in clause (e), for the word “oil”, the
words “mineral oils” shall be substituted;(iii)in clause (g), for the word “mines”, the word “oilfields”
shall be substituted;(iv)after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––“(ga) the
collection, aggregation, dissemination, use or sharing of the data and samples related to mineral oils
with the Central Government or any other party nominated by the Central Government, for the
purposes of economic development, academic research and public welfare;”;(v)in clause (i), for the
words “mined, quarried, excavated or collected”, the word “produced” shall be substituted;(vi)in
clause (j), for the words “owners or lessees of mines of special or periodical returns and reports, and
the forms”, the words “lessees of oilfields of special or periodical returns and reports, and the
formats” shall be substituted;(vii)after clause (j), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:–“(k) the sharing of production and processing facilities and other infrastructure, both on
land and offshore, by two or more lessees for more efficient development of oilfields or production
of mineral oils;(l) the safety at oilfields including safety mechanisms, standards and protocols for
conduct of mineral oil operations, protection of persons and infrastructure such as terminals,
installations, other structures and devices, and mineral oils;(m) the sound management of mineral
oils in accordance with good international petroleum industry practices including obligations of
lessees towards protection of environment during operations and while abandoning,
decommissioning and undertaking site restoration activities;(n) the unitisation of leases across
States, Union territories and offshore leases, where there is reservoir continuity or connectivity, or
for efficient exploration, development or production of mineral oils;(o) promote and facilitate
adoption of measures for reducing carbon and greenhouse gas emissions and decarbonising
operations including but not limited to use of oilfields for other purposes, such as, production of
hydrogen, carbon capture utilisation and storage or coal gasification;(p) reporting of carbon and
greenhouse gas emissions related to, arising out of, or resulting from, mineral oil operations;(q)
promote and facilitate development of comprehensive energy projects at oilfields, including
planning, development, installation, sharing and use of infrastructure for carrying out mineral oil
operations and solar, wind or other form of renewable energy projects;(r) any other matter which is
required to be, or may be made by rules, or in respect of which provision is to be made under this
section.”.
7. Amendment of section 6A.
In section 6A of the principal Act,-(a)for the words “mined, quarried, excavated” wherever they
occur, the word “produced” shall be substituted;(b)in sub-section (2), after the words “mining
lease”, the words “or petroleum lease” shall be inserted;(c)in sub-section (3),––(i)for the words
“crude oil, casing-head condensate or natural gas”, the words “mineral oils” shall be
substituted;(ii)for the words “petroleum or natural gas, or both”, the words “mineral oils” shall be
substituted;(d)in sub-section (4), for the words “mining leases”, the words “petroleum leases” shall
be substituted.
The Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107759007/
3
8. Substitution of new sections 9, 9A and 9B for section 9.
For section 9 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted, namely:—Penalties.“9.
(1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 4A or sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section
6A shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five lakh rupees.(2) Any rule made under any of the
provisions of this Act may provide that any contravention thereof shall be liable to a penalty of
twenty-five lakh rupees.(3) Whoever, after having been punished with penalty as referred to in
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), continues to contravene any of the provisions of this Act or rules
made thereunder, shall be liable to pay a further penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees per
day for the entire duration during which the contravention continues commencing from the date of
imposition of the first penalty.Adjudication.9A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in
the Official Gazette, make rules for providing eligibility criteria for designating an adjudicating
authority and for the manner of conducting inquiry and imposing penalty under the provisions of
this Act:Provided that no officer below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India shall
be designated as an adjudicating authority.(2) The adjudicating authority may summon and enforce
the attendance of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give
evidence or to produce any document, which in his opinion may be useful for or relevant to the
subject matter of the inquiry and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the person concerned has
contravened the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, he may determine such penalty
in accordance with the provisions of this Act.(3) No penalty shall be imposed on any person under
this section or any rules made thereunder without affording an opportunity of being
heard.Appeal9B. (1) Every appeal against the order of the adjudicating authority under this section
shall lie with the Appellate Tribunal referred to in section 30 of the Petroleum and Natural Gas
Regulatory Board Act, 2006 and the provisions contained in sections 33, 34, 35 and 36 of that Act,
shall, mutatis mutandis apply, in relation to every such appeal.(2) The provisions contained in
section 37 of the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006, shall mutatis mutandis
apply, in relation to every appeal against the order of the Appellate Tribunal referred to in
sub-section (1).”.
9. Amendment of section 10.
In section 10 of the principal Act, after the words, figure and letter “of section 6A”, the words and
figure “or section 8” shall be inserted.
10. Amendment of section 11.
In section 11 of the principal Act, for the word “mine” wherever it occurs, the word “oilfield” shall be
substituted.
11. Amendment of section 12.
In section 12 of the principal Act,––(a)for the words “mining lease”, the words “petroleum lease”
shall be substituted;(b)for the word “mine”, the word “oilfield” shall be substituted.
The Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107759007/
4
12. Insertion of new section 13A.
After section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:––Validity of
leases and licenses.“13A. All mining leases and licenses granted before commencement of the
Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 2025, shall continue to be valid for their
respective tenure subject to the terms and conditions governing the grant of such leases and
licenses.”.
The Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107759007/
5
